[Amit Varma]: When we look back at history with the benefit of hindsight, everything can seem inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: We can look at a seminal moment and it may seem that it was meant to be that way. All
[Amit Varma]: the currents of history led up to it. And sometimes the future may even have been shaped
[Amit Varma]: by that event. If there was a story to our existence, that event could seem to be a critical
[Amit Varma]: plot point. But then we may look closer and realize that it almost didn't happen, that
[Amit Varma]: a series of lucky accidents took us to that point. And indeed, everything could be said
[Amit Varma]: to be the culmination of a series of accidents. You change one variable somewhere and different
[Amit Varma]: things happen. History changes, humanity changes. If you go back far enough, maybe there's no
[Amit Varma]: humanity at all. Today's episode is about one such event, a film that seemed to be the
[Amit Varma]: natural progression to all that came before and which shaped all that came after. But
[Unknown]: it almost didn't happen. Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly
[Unknown]: podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Uday Bhatia, author of a wonderful
[Amit Varma]: new book called Bullets Over Bombay, Satya and the Hindi Film Gangster. Uday has been
[Amit Varma]: a film critic for many years, first at Time Out, then at Mint and also on his own blog.
[Amit Varma]: He brings a perspective to his criticism which is shaped as much by world cinema as a love
[Amit Varma]: and appreciation of his own culture. Bullets Over Bombay talks about the importance
[Amit Varma]: of Ram Gopal Verma's 1998 film, Satya. In his narrative, Uday traces two parallel traditions
[Amit Varma]: in Hindi cinema. One is the tradition of the gangster film, another is that of the city
[Amit Varma]: man. For Bombay, as it was then, is as much a hero of Satya as Manoj Bajpai or Chakravarti.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fascinating to see how these traditions evolve and come together in this one landmark
[Amit Varma]: film. Satya is also important because it brought
[Amit Varma]: together a bunch of young, talented people who went on to become stalwarts of the industry
[Amit Varma]: over the next two decades. People like Manoj Bajpai and Anurag Kashyap and no end of names
[Amit Varma]: from the brilliant ensemble cast. At the same time, Satya was shaped by circumstances and
[Amit Varma]: could even be called a product of a series of happy accidents. It's such a great example
[Amit Varma]: of how history can be shaped by serendipity. I loved this conversation with Uday in which
[Amit Varma]: we also discussed his evolution as a film critic. In some ways, this episode is a natural
[Amit Varma]: follow-up to the episode I recorded a few weeks ago with my good friend Jai Arjun Singh.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link that from the show notes. Before we get to this conversation though, let's
[Amit Varma]: take a quick commercial break. Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot
[Amit Varma]: of work in recent years in building a reading habit. This means that I read more books,
[Amit Varma]: but I also read more long-form articles and essays. There's a world of knowledge available
[Amit Varma]: through the internet. But the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read? How do we put the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered
[Amit Varma]: one way. A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people up-level themselves by reading more. A few months ago, I signed
[Amit Varma]: up for one of their programs called The Daily Reader. Every day for six months, they sent
[Amit Varma]: me a long-form article to read. The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology
[Amit Varma]: to mental models and marmalade. This helped me build a habit of reading. At the end of
[Amit Varma]: every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before. So, if you want
[Amit Varma]: to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. New batches start every month. They also have a great program called FutureStack
[Amit Varma]: which helps you stay up-to-date with ideas, skills and mental models that will help you
[Amit Varma]: stay relevant in the future. FutureStack batches start every Saturday. Also, check out their
[Amit Varma]: Social Capital Compound which helps you master social media. What's more, you get a discount
[Amit Varma]: of a whopping 2,500 rupees. 2,500 if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So, head on over
[Amit Varma]: to ctqcompounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN. Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about yourself. How did you get into where you are now? Because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, started off going down a different route, right? So, just tell me about your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: How, you know, did you always like movies? What was it like growing up? Where did you
[Guest]: grow up? You could say I fell into film writing sideways. I grew up in Lucknow and I wasn't
[Guest]: really much of a movie buff growing up. Neither were my parents. So, I just watch as much
[Guest]: as your regular moviegoer or maybe even less than your average moviegoer. And I think this
[Guest]: continued through my childhood. If there was a big, big film, we'd go and see it in the
[Guest]: theatre. Otherwise, it was mostly just on TV or we'd get a videocassette. And when I
[Guest]: went to college in Delhi, that's when things started to pick up a little bit, though even
[Guest]: then I wasn't into film as much. I was much more into music and music writing than I was
[Guest]: into film then. But I started to get a little more interested. I remember there was this
[Guest]: film by Govind Nihalani called Dev with Amitabh Bachchan. And I remember coming back in a
[Guest]: very agitated state after I saw it. And I wrote like, whatever, some 700 words. And
[Guest]: I think then crumpled it up after that. But that was, I think, the first time I put down
[Guest]: my thoughts about a film. But still in college, I would say that even then anyone who knew
[Guest]: me well, knew me as a music fan, and not particularly a film fan. Things kind of changed after that
[Guest]: when I, two things changed. Basically, I got interested in world cinema and I started my
[Guest]: MBA, also in Delhi. And that kind of, you wouldn't think they would be related, but
[Guest]: they were in a weird way because we had three or four very serious cinephiles in the batch
[Guest]: before me. And so they had all the Bergmans and Tarkovskys on a shared drive and you could
[Guest]: just pick it up and watch them. So for the first time, I watched all these films and
[Guest]: they sort of blew my mind and started opening up my idea of cinema. Things kind of went
[Guest]: on from there.
[Amit Varma]: So that's kind of fascinating. And what's also fascinating to me is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: growing up, and I did an episode with Jai Arjun Singh, which you mentioned that you
[Amit Varma]: heard, and Jai and I both kind of grew up in the 80s and then adulthood in the 90s and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. And it's almost a dichotomous experience taking in whatever cultural influences
[Amit Varma]: you've taken, whether it's cinema or music, because it's almost like they're two separate
[Amit Varma]: categories, like Indian music and Western music and Indian cinema and Western cinema.
[Amit Varma]: And it becomes after a period of time, an interesting situation to kind of resolve that
[Amit Varma]: because one is you can just code shift and you can enjoy Indian cinema for what it is
[Amit Varma]: and you can enjoy world cinema as it were for what it is. But the other is that which
[Amit Varma]: I think Jai has done in a very interesting way is that you don't actually see them as
[Amit Varma]: different things after a period of time that your love for cinema is just your love for
[Amit Varma]: cinema period and so on. And Jai has done that much better than me. And it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that you would to some extent have had to do that with in terms of music as well, which
[Amit Varma]: you said, you know, you were writing about you were serious about and all of that. And
[Amit Varma]: you know, I went through those phases. One of the things I boast about is I'm the only
[Amit Varma]: person in the world to have my byline featured in both the Wall Street Journal and the Rock
[Amit Varma]: Street Journal. So in the 90s, I did a bunch of stories for the Rock Street Journal and
[Amit Varma]: all that. But I was heavily into kind of Western music. And it's only much later that I grew
[Amit Varma]: to sort of lose some of that snobbery and gain an appreciation for Indian music. So
[Amit Varma]: what was that journey for you? Because you make it sound really seamless in the sense
[Amit Varma]: I discovered world cinema and I was watching Bergman and Tarkovsky and all that. But at
[Amit Varma]: the same time, you write with such deep insight about Indian cinema, like I learned so much
[Amit Varma]: reading this book, you know, especially the first couple of chapters where you the chapters
[Amit Varma]: where you really go into the history of gangster movies in Hindi cinema, and then city films
[Amit Varma]: in Hindi cinema, I would read read something, go to YouTube, see if it's there, watch clips,
[Amit Varma]: it was like so much deep insight. Tell me a little bit about that. You know, were you
[Amit Varma]: closer to one kind of films than another? And was there an analogue of that in music?
[Guest]: So I actually approached films a lot in the beginning through film criticism, which was
[Guest]: almost a byproduct of a lot of music writing, which I was consuming at that time. I read
[Guest]: a lot of authors like Grial Marcus, Lester Bangs, David Frick, Peter Guralnick, I really,
[Guest]: really enjoyed all their stuff in college, I gained an appreciation of how you could
[Guest]: write about an art form through those initially. And I actually know the turning point from
[Guest]: music criticism to film criticism, because it was in a Lester Bangs review of a Stooges
[Guest]: album. And he talks about Pauline Kael, the great American film critic. And he mentions
[Guest]: a review of Bonnie and Clyde, which she did a very famous review of the film, which she
[Guest]: it was an early rave for the film. And it really sort of made it the sensation that
[Guest]: it was at that time. And he called her style, wonderfully epigrammatic. And first of all,
[Guest]: I had to look up epigrammatic. And once I did, I thought that's a really nice thing
[Guest]: to say about someone's writing. And so I looked up Pauline Kael through that. And that was
[Guest]: actually my start into film criticism. And it just sort of proceeded organically because
[Guest]: I was getting interested in world cinema. I think at that time, you had just started
[Guest]: getting foreign films on DVDs in India. So I, you know, I could buy a few of those you
[Guest]: had a lot, which you could get second hand in Palika Bazaar in Delhi. And so I'd watch
[Guest]: those and I'd print out the the Criterion collection booklets because they have the
[Guest]: essays on their site. So I used to print them out and read them. So a lot of the film knowledge
[Guest]: that I actually had in the early days was theoretical, I would, I'd have read about
[Guest]: say Contempt or Band of Outsiders or something before I even seen the film. So I was coming
[Guest]: at it almost backwards, in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: That's wonderful. And you and you speak about buying DVDs at Palika Bazaar. And it just
[Amit Varma]: kind of reminded me like I've just moved house. And a couple of the cartons, which the last
[Amit Varma]: time we moved house nine years ago, we had these, you know, a couple of cartons full
[Amit Varma]: of audio cassettes and a couple of cartons full of CDs and DVDs. And we were just trying
[Amit Varma]: to figure out what the hell do we do with them now, because this is Bombay, right, small
[Amit Varma]: flats and all that, relatively, and they're taking up so much space. And eventually, we
[Amit Varma]: kind of decided that, listen, I'm, we're just going to take pictures of the audio cassettes
[Amit Varma]: or whatever that, you know, just take pictures of the whole the pile for nostalgia sake,
[Amit Varma]: keep a couple of mixtapes we might have made back in the past for each other and just chuck
[Amit Varma]: the rest because there's nothing you do with that. And DVDs kind of feels like that sort
[Amit Varma]: of foregone era there. So you know, when you sort of start discovering world cinema like
[Amit Varma]: this, I mean, one of the fascinating ways of discovering it in this manner where you've
[Amit Varma]: read the criticism about the film before you actually see the film is that you're kind
[Amit Varma]: of viewing it in a different way, you're viewing it with different eyes, and so on. Does this
[Amit Varma]: carry over then to all the viewing that you do? Like I know that when people start writing
[Amit Varma]: seriously, for example, it changes the way they read, you know, they'll notice all the
[Amit Varma]: tools that a writer is using and the way they build rhythm, the way they use paragraphs,
[Amit Varma]: all of all of those things. And obviously, not that you were intending to be a filmmaker,
[Amit Varma]: but just shifting your gaze and looking at films in this kind of a way. Does that number
[Amit Varma]: one change the way you look at all the films you've already seen, for example, that when
[Amit Varma]: you revisit something, you see things that you didn't do. And then when you try to apply
[Amit Varma]: that gaze to Indian cinema, how easy or hard is it that there aren't really too many people
[Amit Varma]: who have trodden that path when it comes to say, Hindi films, right? So we can talk about
[Amit Varma]: Grail Marcus writing about Bob Dylan, and there's a rich tradition of writing happening
[Amit Varma]: out there. And with Indian classical music, I'm sure there's an equally rich tradition
[Amit Varma]: here. But when it comes to Hindi films, or the kind of work that, you know, you and Jay
[Amit Varma]: have done in recent years, and the kind of book that you have written, does that begin
[Amit Varma]: to change? And also, when you watch Hindi cinema, having, you know, watched the best
[Amit Varma]: of world cinema, what is it like? Is it that you're seeing more? Or is it that you're thinking
[Amit Varma]: of it less? In the sense, you realize all the different ways in which it is lacking?
[Guest]: So that's an interesting question. And I think the first thing I can say is that luckily
[Guest]: for me, in my initial years, when I was getting interested in cinema, I wasn't really looking
[Guest]: at being a film writer. I'd done my MBA, so I was working in market research for many
[Guest]: years. And I was just watching films in my free time. And I was watching everything then
[Guest]: I started, of course, with world cinema, then I just went back, I already had a reasonable
[Guest]: amount of classic Hollywood viewing. So I'd seen the Hitchcocks, and I caught up on the
[Guest]: Fords and Billy Wilder and Howard Hawks. I had a bit of those and also 70s Hollywood,
[Guest]: I had those 80s, 90s Hollywood, I used to watch a lot of TV. So I knew a bit of that
[Guest]: Hindi, I had to go and relearn or rewatch a lot of stuff which people already knew,
[Guest]: simply because we weren't much of a film watching family and the default at home were Disney
[Guest]: animation video cassettes and, and Tom and Jerry and like a few things like Mary Poppins
[Guest]: and Sound of Music and stuff. So there really wasn't much Sholay or Golmaal or anything
[Guest]: lying around the house. So I'd seen some of the famous ones, but I hadn't, like I'd missed
[Guest]: entire eras, entire very famous actors. So once I started getting interested, I tried
[Guest]: to catch up on all of it, not in any planned way. But I just kept, I just kept watching
[Guest]: for about four or five years without doing anything much about it. And at the same time,
[Guest]: I started blogging. And about, I'd say, a good 60-70% of those pieces were about film.
[Guest]: And I can't read those early pieces now, because they're just attempts to imitate all the film
[Guest]: writers whom I liked at that time and write things which I really wasn't in much control
[Guest]: of. But it was useful in a couple of ways. One, it got me writing regularly, which I
[Guest]: hadn't done before. And two, it allowed me to have something to show when I applied for
[Guest]: my first journalism job, which was to timeout, because I didn't have any journalism training.
[Guest]: And I really, I was really raw. At that time, all I really had was this blog, and I showed
[Guest]: it and quite luckily, I think I was hired as their film and theatre person in Delhi.
[Guest]: There were already people in Bombay doing the reviews, so that pressure wasn't there.
[Guest]: But I was allowed to write at least some stuff on it.
[Amit Varma]: And how did that shift from sort of doing an MBA to deciding to become a journalist
[Amit Varma]: happen? Like, you know, pre MBA, what was your image of yourself? What did you see yourself
[Amit Varma]: doing? How formed was it? And at what point do you then decide that the corporate life
[Amit Varma]: is not for me? And, you know, because we've never met, and I don't know you, therefore
[Amit Varma]: have to ask that, did you want to be just a journalist and write about movies? Or did
[Amit Varma]: you see yourself as making movies at some point in time? Tell me a bit more about how
[Amit Varma]: your conception of yourself grew and eventually led you to do what you did?
[Guest]: So I think the simple answer is I got very bored after about four and a half, five years
[Guest]: as a market researcher. And my heart wasn't in it. And I knew that maybe like, two years
[Guest]: in, I knew that but I didn't really act on it. And I didn't think that after I quit,
[Guest]: I would try to be a journalist because I didn't think that I could. I had no training, I had
[Guest]: no idea how it was done. There was no one in my family who was a writer of any kind.
[Guest]: It didn't seem like a field I could break into, but I quit cold turkey. And I just applied
[Guest]: on a whim to a couple of places. And I think that I got pretty lucky in that sense, that
[Guest]: something landed. My conception of myself as a film writer, I think even that took a
[Guest]: few years after joining Time Out to sort of solidify because when you get in to something
[Guest]: like this, you feel that, oh, there's so much I haven't seen. How will I when I when I get
[Guest]: to do reviews of like the next Salman Khan film that's that's coming out on the weekend,
[Guest]: how am I going to do it with only four hours to write the review. And so it took a while
[Guest]: for me to even sort of think of myself as a proper film critic. And the learning kept
[Guest]: on in the first couple of years of the job.
[Amit Varma]: So as you started blogging, how did your sort of writing style evolve in terms of writing
[Amit Varma]: about cinema per se? Because as you're blogging, like one thing you pointed out is that one
[Amit Varma]: of the good things about it, which I sort of will double down on because I feel the
[Amit Varma]: same effect happened to me is that when you're writing a lot, it just gets easier and more
[Amit Varma]: fluent and less, less self conscious and all of that. But did you also kind of begin to
[Amit Varma]: feel changes in your craft? Think about your craft per se? Was the act of then actually
[Amit Varma]: writing for a magazine like Time Out and you know, all the people you wrote for after that,
[Amit Varma]: did that kind of affect your writing? Tell me a bit about thinking about your writing
[Amit Varma]: per se during this entire period.
[Guest]: So in the start, it's a bit difficult to, to have a style of your own. And you're very
[Guest]: conscious of that also, if you're a slightly self aware writer, and you know that, I like
[Guest]: Pauline Kael, I like David Thompson, I like Jeffrey O'Brien, then you know that, oh, I'm
[Guest]: I'm taking this phrasing from this person, I'm taking this sort of approach from so and
[Guest]: so. And for the first, first few years, of course, there was a lot of that first few
[Guest]: years of the job, I would say there was enough and you kind of grow into your own style,
[Guest]: I think, as you said, the more you write. And also, I think the more you start thinking
[Guest]: about film, you develop more original thoughts about it, and you don't have to rely on received
[Guest]: wisdom about it. I saw those changes come slowly for me, it took a few years and I was
[Guest]: in retrospect, I'm quite happy that I wasn't doing weekly reviews at the start. Because
[Guest]: I think that would be a lot of pressure. And I see a lot of young writers made to do that
[Guest]: now. And it's a tough thing doing that, like, just when you're thrust into your first job,
[Guest]: and then writing a review. And in a few hours, sometimes, sometimes you just have to watch
[Guest]: it on Friday, because the worse films don't have press shows now, they just release it
[Guest]: cold. And so you go see it on a Friday morning. And by Friday afternoon, your editors asking
[Guest]: why isn't the review up so you literally have to go with your first impressions, and more
[Guest]: often than not, your first draft. So that would have been a very difficult thing for
[Guest]: me to do when I was starting out. I'm glad I didn't have to do that. I think also just
[Guest]: in terms of reading more widely, and figuring out how people do certain things, rather than
[Guest]: just reviewing, I think how people approach criticism as as a whole. There's a British
[Guest]: writer named David Thompson, whom I'm a big fan of, and he has a book called Have you
[Guest]: seen 1001 films to watch before you die, something like that. And I would recommend that to anybody
[Guest]: who is getting into film criticism, simply because he offers so many strategies of going
[Guest]: at a film, he just he writes about all these films, and but he never goes at it the same
[Guest]: way there are all these different approaches, which he tries out in this one book. And that
[Guest]: really influenced me in terms of that you may be writing reviews, but you don't have
[Guest]: to start at the same way you can find different ways of getting into it through character
[Guest]: or through a particular scene, or through something in the newspaper or through something
[Guest]: that really moved you. And those things sort of started becoming more evident to me as
[Guest]: time went on. And then I guess a certain kind of style started evolving. And I started to
[Guest]: realize certain things that I was interested in, maybe more so than other critics, I liked
[Guest]: going back into film history and seeing where things fit. I like trying to situate things
[Guest]: in a certain context of their genre and and pass people who have done something similar.
[Guest]: And that I saw, I think the first long freelance piece I did was on Chetan Anand's Nicha Nagar,
[Guest]: which is the first and only Indian film to win the top award at the Cannes Film Festival,
[Guest]: also the inaugural Cannes Film Festival. So that was very interesting for me because it
[Guest]: allowed me to do some crate digging and I realized I really enjoy that. And I've done
[Guest]: a lot of that since I've written on the very first screening that ever took place in India
[Guest]: at Watson's Hotel in 1896. And that was, again, great fun for me because I managed to speak
[Guest]: to people who had clippings and ads from that first screening. And it sort of allowed me
[Guest]: to recreate what it might have been like at that time, which has always been something
[Guest]: very interesting for me. So I think then you just start learning about your own interests,
[Guest]: especially within criticism through the years. I realized that I was very interested in the
[Guest]: idea of film censorship. So I've written a couple of long pieces about that. And I continue
[Guest]: to be very interested in that because India is the place to be if you want to write about
[Guest]: film censorship. So, yeah, I think that it was just something that my style maybe and
[Guest]: my approach to film criticism sort of evolved over a bunch of years.
[Amit Varma]: And how much did format and form affect this? Because like when you're writing your blog,
[Amit Varma]: you have complete freedom, you can do whatever you can go wherever. But if you're writing
[Amit Varma]: for Time Out, if you're writing reviews for Mint, there is a sort of a word count that
[Amit Varma]: is expected. And also, I would imagine that in Time Out, there would also be some functional
[Amit Varma]: expectation that you have to kind of tell the listener what to expect. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: do they have a house style there, which you have to adhere to? How does that then work?
[Amit Varma]: Does that sort of shape your work? And is one way that you can break out of that is
[Amit Varma]: one way just by also blogging regularly on the site so you can satisfy your other urges,
[Guest]: sir?
[Guest]: So even when I was blogging at the start, I didn't really write these long, long essays
[Guest]: that people were known to do in the glory days of blogging in India, I think simply
[Guest]: because maybe I didn't have that much to say at that time. And when I joined Time Out,
[Guest]: if you remember, Time Out really had long word counts for anything. Even the covers
[Guest]: weren't too long and the pieces were 600-700 words at the most. And reviews were often
[Guest]: 400 words, 500 words. And I didn't even start off with theatre reviews. So I did DVD reviews
[Guest]: when I was starting out. So those could be 250 words. So I think that really drilled
[Guest]: in me the virtue of being able to say as much interesting stuff in as vibrant a manner as
[Guest]: possible in as few words. And I see its effect even today where when I write something, and
[Guest]: this was a big, this was a big issue when I when I was writing the book initially, because
[Guest]: I did not have that tendency to expand on a thought. My approach was always to narrow
[Guest]: it down to get to the essence of things simply because Time Out was in print, and it had
[Guest]: small word counts. And I knew I had to finish it in this much time. And that became sort
[Guest]: of set for me. So even later, when I moved to places, I worked for Sunday Guardian for
[Guest]: a short time in Delhi. And since then, I've been in Mint, where the word counts are longer
[Guest]: it took me a little while to adjust to that. And, of course, when I was writing the book,
[Guest]: it took me a while to adjust to that, because I was like, you can't get to the point all
[Guest]: the time. While writing a book, you have to, you have to set a lot of scenes at some lengths
[Guest]: and you have to talk about everything rather than rather than some just, you know, whatever
[Guest]: might be relevant in a narrow sense. So that was something I had to kind of unlearn or
[Guest]: maybe an extra skill that I had to learn over time. So format has played quite quite a role,
[Guest]: I think, in my in my side.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, fascinating. And like, I think one place where I might have noticed this tussle during
[Amit Varma]: the book is when you're talking about sort of the gangster film of the 1980s. And you
[Amit Varma]: have a footnote about Subhash Ghai. And you kind of apologize for not mentioning his films
[Amit Varma]: in the main text, but you put a footnote and you talk about Vidhata and that scene where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Dilip Kumar is doing what he does, which immediately made me go to YouTube and
[Amit Varma]: kind of look it up. And that scene wasn't there by itself. So I had to look for Vidhata
[Amit Varma]: and then try to find the scene within that. So tell me also, you know, when one starts
[Amit Varma]: reviewing and I sort of say this as someone who's gone through the process myself, though
[Amit Varma]: I reviewed music much more than films, did much more of music and books at a certain
[Amit Varma]: point. You know, when you are a young writer, you are sort of keen to also in a sense, show
[Amit Varma]: off not just your writing skills, but also, you know, your insights, which you're kind
[Amit Varma]: of building into it. And there might be a tendency there to sort of go too far, to stretch
[Amit Varma]: too far and to look for significance where there is none or to draw connections to show
[Amit Varma]: your intimate knowledge and all of that. So how does one kind of get past that? Because
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, one step of getting past that is you become aware that you're doing
[Amit Varma]: this. And the other step is that you learn to kind of put yourself out of the equation
[Amit Varma]: and just focus on whatever you're sort of writing. So, and I noticed that you've tackled
[Amit Varma]: this extremely well in the book, which of course has come when you're many years down
[Amit Varma]: the line in your career, where one sort of temptation could have been to constantly insert
[Amit Varma]: yourself in the narrative, because part of gathering all the information about Satya
[Amit Varma]: involves you're talking to all these different people with their different memories. And
[Amit Varma]: that's kind of a journey in itself. And I can imagine the temptation to sort of also
[Amit Varma]: put yourself there, but you appear really extremely sparingly in the book, you just
[Amit Varma]: kind of let the story tell itself. And I'm not even saying that that approach would necessarily
[Amit Varma]: have been wrong. These are just different approaches. So how do you think about this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, when you look back on your older pieces, or your early blog posts, or whatever, what
[Amit Varma]: do you think? Is this something that you've kind of consciously thought about?
[Guest]: It is a big issue with, I mean, with me it was and with pretty much every film critic
[Guest]: I know starting out that temptation to make blanket renouncements and to say things like,
[Guest]: you know, best film you'll see this year, or best film you've ever seen in your life
[Guest]: or things like that. I think two or three things help. Maybe, as you said, self-awareness,
[Guest]: you have to, at some level, ask yourself when you write things like that, do I really want
[Guest]: to go on that limb? Am I that sure that it will be the best film that people see? If
[Guest]: you are, then go for it, because you may as well. If you don't feel strongly about films,
[Guest]: about certain films that you think are great, and you don't want to say that, then that
[Guest]: again, you won't be able to last too long. You have to sort of give voice to your enthusiasms.
[Guest]: But again, there should be that self-awareness that if I'm saying this, I need to be able
[Guest]: to back it up, preferably in the review itself. The other thing is, you really benefit from
[Guest]: having sympathetic editors at that stage in your career, which I had, luckily when I was
[Guest]: coming in, not only for Time Out as a whole, but also a film editor who would ask them
[Guest]: that, you know, do you really mean this? Was it this good? Don't call him an auteur. He's
[Guest]: just a regular director. I was guilty of calling some. I don't remember, but it was some Indian
[Guest]: director and I just use auteur because I was reading so many pieces which had auteur in
[Guest]: it and I shouldn't have. And it took someone to point that out. I don't think I've ever
[Guest]: used the word auteur since then in anything. But yeah, so that really helps. And also,
[Guest]: it just helps reading other people after you've written something about a particular film,
[Guest]: even if you don't think they're the greatest critics. But if you read other viewpoints
[Guest]: on it, you can at least argue with them and say, no, they're wrong. I think the film is
[Guest]: still great. But if they are saying something useful, I think you should be able to incorporate
[Guest]: that in your thinking. And at least if not, totally walk back what you said, keep it in
[Guest]: mind for the next time you're saying something similar.
[Amit Varma]: And just as an aside, if I asked you to name any auteurs currently in the Hindi film industry,
[Guest]: does anyone come to mind?
[Guest]: My feelings towards the auteur theory itself have changed very much over the years since
[Guest]: I started. I have gone from being, you know, very influenced by it to feeling that a lot
[Guest]: of it is very suspect. And I don't know, I guess the first name that comes to mind is
[Guest]: weirdly a filmmaker who probably isn't my favorite filmmaker, but would fit the definition
[Guest]: of an auteur most would be Sanjay Leela Bhansali, I think. Not a favorite of yours also, I think.
[Guest]: And it's just that you can see his mark on whatever he does. He never makes a non-Sanjay
[Guest]: Leela Bhansali film since he started. So in that sense, he would be the true definition
[Guest]: of an auteur. But I don't know how much that really counts for now.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's a fantastic example, because you're absolutely right. I mean, you see his vision
[Amit Varma]: and everything he does. You and I may not like it for different reasons, but I mean,
[Amit Varma]: it is what it is. Now, you mentioned sort of always being curious about the history
[Amit Varma]: of cinema and going back to see, okay, this was the first showing and your book is of
[Amit Varma]: course full of delightful history, which sort of sets so much context. How do you do this
[Amit Varma]: kind of research? Because beyond the point there aren't, to the best of my awareness,
[Amit Varma]: there isn't such rich literature available in India for Hindi cinema beyond a few standard
[Amit Varma]: books, which will really take you deep back. So how are you gaining all this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: And if a lot of it comes from, you know, talking to old timers, talking to people, you know,
[Amit Varma]: dredging their memories, how does that kind of work? Take me a little bit through that
[Amit Varma]: and whether this was something that you used to do deliberately before you set out to write
[Amit Varma]: a book like this, because this book, obviously it makes it instrumental to go back into history
[Amit Varma]: because you have to give all this context. But apart from this, you know, what was your
[Amit Varma]: approach and how would you manage? Where would you find your dope?
[Guest]: So as you said, there's a huge stumbling block in the sense that we haven't documented our
[Guest]: cinema history well at all. It is very difficult to find material on the old films. It's also
[Guest]: very difficult to view the old films. So that is actually the biggest stumbling block. When
[Guest]: I had started the book, I was hoping to see that, you know, if I could see some things
[Guest]: from the thirties, gangster films from the thirties, because I found mentions of things
[Guest]: that were crime films made by Parsi filmmakers and other Bombay filmmakers and they sounded
[Guest]: really interesting. But I didn't want to write about them only in theory, if I couldn't even
[Guest]: see a still of any of them. In the end, I started the book with Kismet, the chapter
[Guest]: on the gangsters with Kismet, which is a 1943 film, which you can actually see. It's on
[Guest]: YouTube and the print is decent. And so that was as far as I could confidently trace the
[Guest]: gangster film. But if there was more access and if we had done more to archive film history,
[Guest]: I could have possibly gone further back. I would have liked to go all the way back to
[Guest]: the silence, which was not possible. In terms of my work, it does involve speaking to old
[Guest]: filmmakers, academics who have that kind of knowledge. There are a couple of writers who
[Guest]: have done great work in Indian film history. There is one named B.D. Garga, who's written
[Guest]: the definitive account of nonfiction film in India. And he's also written about early
[Guest]: film and a history of Indian cinema as a whole. So he is the go-to person for anything that
[Guest]: is pre-60s in Indian cinema. Besides that, you just sort of look around, try and get
[Guest]: lucky, get newspaper clippings. I managed to do that for my piece on the first film
[Guest]: screening and for the censorship piece that I'd written. And for this book, I found some
[Guest]: interesting ones. I'd asked a couple of friends in academia to look around for me and they
[Guest]: got me a newspaper account of a crime that had been committed in the 50s. It was a bank
[Guest]: heist. And very interestingly, that heist then turns up in Aarpaar in a slightly changed
[Guest]: form. And Anurag Kashyap had mentioned that when I had spoken to him, he got the name
[Guest]: of the film wrong, but he mentioned that there was this heist that had happened. And I just
[Guest]: took that nugget and I started searching and very luckily things turned up and I could
[Guest]: write about that with a little bit of background then.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. And you mentioned B.D. Garga. I think I have one of his books called So
[Amit Varma]: Many Cinemas Lying Around Somewhere, which is a pretty encyclopedia. I get confused with
[Amit Varma]: names. So at one point, I was discussing biographies of Indian freedom fighters with a friend of
[Amit Varma]: mine. And I wanted to refer to B.R. Nanda's biography of Nehru. But instead I said B.D.
[Amit Varma]: Garga's biography of Nehru. Have you read that? And there was this sort of person practically
[Amit Varma]: sorting through their mind to figure out what happened here. What is this kind of connection?
[Amit Varma]: And I can imagine that person then calling their nearest antique bookshop owner and saying
[Amit Varma]: dhoondo, kuch bhi karo, dhoondo. So anyway, so and I'm guessing a certain part of your
[Amit Varma]: job after a period of time, and especially when you were writing this book where you
[Amit Varma]: had to get in touch with all of these people, you know, you mentioned in the book about
[Amit Varma]: how you had to sort of it took you a year and a half or more than that to actually be
[Amit Varma]: able to speak to everyone. And you'd have to speak to the secretary and somehow get
[Amit Varma]: an appointment and this and that, which is both surprising and not surprising to me,
[Amit Varma]: because it's surprising because you'd imagine that, hey, this is something they'd love to
[Amit Varma]: talk about, right, but also not surprising, because hey, Bollywood. So what in general,
[Amit Varma]: when you speak to film stars, film directors, what is that process like for you? Like, do
[Amit Varma]: you at some level find it, you know, like can happen to young reporters sometimes find
[Amit Varma]: it demeaning that you have to keep chasing people and begging for an interview and this
[Amit Varma]: and that. And when you do meet them, you know, is there that pressure that I have limited
[Amit Varma]: time with this person, and I have to convince this person. And from their part, also, there
[Amit Varma]: must be a certain distrust, because they simply may not get what you do as a film critic,
[Amit Varma]: like we saw in that recent bust up between Taapsee Pandu and I think Shubhra Gupta, who
[Amit Varma]: wrote that review, where, you know, she said uncomplimentary thing about Taapsee's acting
[Amit Varma]: and Taapsee just took off. So how does that equation kind of work out? What's what have
[Amit Varma]: your experiences been like?
[Guest]: So luckily, I had, like, at least half a decade or more of film writing and film journalism
[Guest]: behind me when I started on this, which was useful, because I had a very clear idea of
[Guest]: how difficult it was to get through to a lot of these people. So the abhi toh humein aur
[Guest]: bhi zaleel hona hai was, I started off with that mindset, I knew that it wouldn't be easy
[Guest]: and so I just kept doing my own research, along with speaking to people and I kept adding
[Guest]: my own thoughts on the film and on the gangster film on the city film on the 90s on whatever
[Guest]: came after Satya, while I also tried to then keep going through it and I had to try pretty
[Guest]: much everything. So luckily, I was in Bombay, a lot of these people are in Bombay and are
[Guest]: active in film. So at least they had PR agents and people whom I could go through. But yeah,
[Guest]: it wasn't particularly easy. I'll say though, that once I did get through to them, everyone
[Guest]: spoke with great enthusiasm, except Ramu, everyone spoke with great enthusiasm about
[Guest]: the film, about their time on it, the impact it had on their careers. So it was very fresh
[Guest]: in their minds, even though it's been like 20, 21, 22 years since Satya for them. They
[Guest]: saw it as some kind of formative experience, most of them because a lot of them were starting
[Guest]: their careers. So I didn't have to convince them about the importance of the project.
[Guest]: I think they were very happy that someone was writing on Satya. I think just the problem
[Guest]: was getting through to them and nailing them down, getting them for sufficient amounts
[Guest]: of time. And in the rare opportunity that I got to follow up with some of them, nailing
[Guest]: them down for that also. It was quite a long sort of thing, though. I think I wrote one
[Guest]: and a half years in the book to interview all of them, but that was just the ones whom
[Guest]: I went out and met. Even after that, I was getting hold of people on Skype or on the
[Guest]: phone. I think Chakravarti and I in particular missed so many calls of ours. I think we may
[Guest]: have had like upward of 50 small conversations. But the quantum of what we spoke may have
[Guest]: been less than what I spoke with Anurag in one session.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when a critic meets a practitioner, so, you know, you've seen a film, you've seen
[Amit Varma]: it in a particular way. You have your view of it, your theories of it and all that. And
[Amit Varma]: then you meet a practitioner and you might feel that, hey, this scene was done like this
[Amit Varma]: for this. And this is where the tradition comes from and all of that. And then that
[Amit Varma]: person can just say something like, nahi yaar, hamara trolley kaam nahi kar raha tha, isliye
[Amit Varma]: usko bola ki shoulder pe rakh chal. So does that kind of happen where, you know, criticism
[Amit Varma]: collides with the view of the practitioner and you are like, wait, you know, there's
[Amit Varma]: another layer to it that, you know, I don't know about. And, you know, what's that like?
[Guest]: I think I have a healthy self-awareness of my lack of knowledge about film as a practical
[Guest]: craft. I mean, I know a bit simply through like reading films and watching them and hearing
[Guest]: people speak about them and the little I've seen here and there, the shoots I've seen,
[Guest]: but it's really not much. So I am completely receptive to people telling me that, oh, you
[Guest]: know, you were coming with all these things, but actually things just sort of fell into
[Guest]: place and all. Which was, I think, to be fair, a lot of Satya was really that. This was to
[Guest]: a large extent a film that was made on the fly. A lot of the writing was done the day
[Guest]: before or on the morning of the shoot or just before lines would be handed to the actors.
[Guest]: And that was because Varma wanted it that way. He'd had an experience early on in the
[Guest]: scene where Sushant Singh gets slashed by Satya and he screams. And that scream was
[Guest]: where the thing was supposed to cut, but it was such a loud scream that Ramu did not cut
[Guest]: at that point. And he just let the scene play. And because Sushant was a theatre actor, he
[Guest]: was smart enough to be able to improvise and the people around him also improvised and
[Guest]: the scene became a lot richer. And Ramu liked that so much that he said that I want that
[Guest]: energy in the rest of the film. I don't want things to go according to plan. And don't
[Guest]: worry about the lines. Throw them out. We'll write them on the spot. You can improvise
[Guest]: if you want. And he let his actors free and his writers free. And I think that sort of
[Guest]: informed the way the film is. I think in terms of people saying that, oh, you're a critic,
[Guest]: you're overthinking this. I got that mostly from Ramu, who would often deflate my bigger
[Guest]: theories about things. And at one point he said, you know, I think people went like Satya
[Guest]: because it was the first time they heard certain cuss words in the hall. And it was the first
[Guest]: time they saw people being realistic as gangsters and not because they thought it was a particularly
[Guest]: new kind of film or a different way of seeing Mumbai or something. So, yeah, I think that
[Guest]: attitude mostly came from Ramu. But the others were pretty much OK. Some of them liked the
[Guest]: theories and they were happy to encourage them. And it seems to me that the journey
[Amit Varma]: that it feels odd for me to call somebody Verma, but and it feels odd for me to call
[Amit Varma]: somebody Ramu also because I don't know the guy. But, you know, there's a thing with public
[Amit Varma]: figures that you feel like you own them. So like Sachin did this batting, Ramu did that.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll just kind of get over that and call him Ramu or call him RGV. I'll call him RGV.
[Amit Varma]: I think that's a good compromise. So one of the interesting arcs that you've also traced
[Amit Varma]: is how his own style changed. And in Satya, it kind of seemed to come from one extreme
[Amit Varma]: to the other, whereas early films are like super stylized and everything is shot in a
[Amit Varma]: particular way. And you talk about how there are influences of old Bollywood, there are
[Amit Varma]: influences from Hollywood through the 80s. You know, Hong Kong cinema also started showing
[Amit Varma]: its influences and you've traced all of those in the works of various people. But at Satya,
[Amit Varma]: it's like he's finally, you know, comfortable in his own skin, at peace with himself, just
[Amit Varma]: kind of going with the flow and that's great. And I'll sort of come to that a couple of
[Amit Varma]: larger questions, though, before we start talking about Satya itself. And one of them
[Amit Varma]: is that it seems that in the narrative of your book, which is a great narrative in which
[Amit Varma]: I found convincing, but it is still nevertheless one narrative. Satya is sort of a central
[Amit Varma]: point in Indian cinema where everything that has happened before in terms of city films
[Amit Varma]: and gangster films and all of that lead up to it, you know, so you have gangster films
[Amit Varma]: evolving in a certain way, till you reach a point where the gangster is a real person,
[Amit Varma]: not a caricature anymore, not over the top, with real relationships in the real world
[Amit Varma]: as Bhikhu Matre has with his wife. And at the same time, you have city films evolving
[Amit Varma]: in a way where cities are shown in a particular way and eventually, they are as close to realism
[Amit Varma]: as you can get without calling it a documentary style. So your first narrative is about how
[Amit Varma]: all of Indian cinema seems to lead to Satya. And your next narrative is that whatever happens
[Amit Varma]: after that emerges from Satya, that there are these incredibly talented people within
[Amit Varma]: the film who become big figures in what is to happen in Hindi cinema later, whether it's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Anurag Kashyap doing the writing or that incredible ensemble of cast, all of
[Amit Varma]: whom kind of became stars, starting with the stunning Manoj Bajpai himself, and even kind
[Amit Varma]: of the hangers on like, you know, the Sriram Raghavans and all of those guys. So it's almost
[Amit Varma]: like an whole ecosystem kind of emerges out of there. And this is a narrative and Satya
[Amit Varma]: is so central. Now, did you earlier before you conceived of the book, and I'll ask you
[Amit Varma]: how you conceived of it as well, because I guess that's part of the story. But did you
[Amit Varma]: see Satya as central earlier? Did all of these people see Satya as that central? Was it,
[Amit Varma]: you know, if there was no Satya, you know, and this is like the great man theory of history.
[Amit Varma]: So you could say the great film theory of history, if there was no Satya, would everything
[Amit Varma]: still have happened more or less the same way? Or was it just this stunning, serendipitous
[Amit Varma]: departure which changed everything and which was sort of an at the same time, an inevitable
[Amit Varma]: outcrop of what had come before?
[Guest]: I actually really wanted to look at what had come before Satya. Simply because by the time
[Guest]: I was into film and writing about it, Satya was fairly well regarded as the origin of
[Guest]: a lot of stuff that came after it. The Hindi indie film, the birth of the new character
[Guest]: actor, as it were. Obviously, the new gangster film went from there and other things that
[Guest]: we can come to. But basically, that part of the story was already fairly well established.
[Guest]: People knew that Satya was very important and that it was some kind of landmark in Indian
[Guest]: film history. Not many people saw Satya as something that came out of a tradition. There
[Guest]: are a couple of reasons for that. The gangster film tradition in India, as I've tried to
[Guest]: show in the book, is not one that emerged with the force that it did in any of the other
[Guest]: countries. It sort of came up in fits and starts. And if you kind of directly try and
[Guest]: link Satya to some of the earlier iterations of gangster films in India, there is nothing
[Guest]: obvious. And Verma definitely did not have any direct inspiration from that, as he told
[Guest]: me, and I completely believe him from that. But at the same time, you do see, say, from
[Guest]: Arj Satya onwards, films like Arj Satya, Arjun, Agnipath, obviously Parinda, Nayakan, films
[Guest]: like these are creating a certain sort of the grammar of the Indian gangster film, which
[Guest]: Satya can then pick up on, in the sense it doesn't have to do all the groundwork itself.
[Guest]: So it did build on what these films had, even if it was very different from all these films.
[Guest]: And the twin tradition, which is of the city film, was again something that, something
[Guest]: I hadn't seen Satya situated in very much. And it sort of occurred to me early on that
[Guest]: this might be a fruitful way to think of this, because Satya, as we know, is a film shot
[Guest]: largely in real locations. There were not many studio sets, there wasn't any extensive
[Guest]: lighting, there wasn't much costuming, people got their own costumes, or they just bought
[Guest]: stuff off the streets and wore it. It's very much ingrained in the daily life of Bombay.
[Guest]: You can't really set Satya in another city. It just wouldn't work. It's not just a gangster
[Guest]: film, it is a Bombay street film, in the purest sense. So I wanted to try and see the other
[Guest]: films that had shown Bombay as a real place rather than the cinematic Bombay, which is
[Guest]: nearly all of Hindi cinema. And, but there are films in between which have shown Bombay
[Guest]: as a real living place where actual people spend their lives and speak in a certain way
[Guest]: and negotiate the city and interact with its administration and with its transport, and
[Guest]: in the 90s with its underworld. And I wanted to see, you know, whether these two traditions
[Guest]: came together before Satya and you could see signs of that also by the late 80s with films
[Guest]: like Salim Langda Pe Matro or Salaam Bombay or Raak, which are not gangster films, but
[Guest]: they have elements of criminality and you can see how the gangster film and the city
[Guest]: film might merge. And Satya was the first time that this was done entirely successfully.
[Amit Varma]: Both these historical strands were so illuminating for me, and I'm going to have to do a lot
[Amit Varma]: of film watching over the next few weeks. My other sort of larger question really has
[Amit Varma]: to do with the nature of fanhood and trends, like on an unrelated note, seemingly unrelated
[Amit Varma]: note, you know, there is this sort of study that looks into why people form sporting allegiances,
[Amit Varma]: and how that process works. For example, when do fans of Premier League clubs become fans
[Amit Varma]: of those particular clubs, especially if like most Indians have never even been to the city
[Amit Varma]: in question. And how that theory goes is that when you are a particular age, and you start
[Amit Varma]: following a sport when you're say 12 or 13, or whatever it is, I've forgotten the exact
[Amit Varma]: numbers, whichever club is doing really well at that particular point in time, you become
[Amit Varma]: a fan of one of those clubs, and you kind of follow that which is why you know, if you
[Amit Varma]: meet an Arsenal fan, you'll know they are a certain age and you know, kids today are
[Amit Varma]: probably City and Liverpool fans and so on and all of that. Now, it strikes me that there
[Amit Varma]: might be a similar thing happening in terms of artistic trends as well, that you know,
[Amit Varma]: what what happens in India in a social sense is you have the liberalisation of 91, you
[Amit Varma]: have a burgeoning of this middle class, you have many more people consuming cinema from
[Amit Varma]: everywhere, books from everywhere, music from everywhere. And at this point, comes this
[Amit Varma]: film Satya, which does some important things so well, which shows people in Bombay talking
[Amit Varma]: as people in Bombay talk in the kind of surroundings which people in Bombay immediately recognise,
[Amit Varma]: and even people in other cities would recognise as actual and real. And it's a confluence
[Amit Varma]: of so many things. And therefore, it captures the imagination. And therefore, it becomes
[Amit Varma]: really big. And one of the criticisms you could then point out is that you have these
[Amit Varma]: sort of Satya imitations happening or influences being taken to new places, whether you look
[Amit Varma]: at the negative or the positive of it. And you know, it's almost like, before that, when
[Amit Varma]: you look at the Indian literary novel, for example, like I think one of the things with
[Amit Varma]: Salman Rushdie getting the book of A Midnight's Children is too many people in subsequent
[Amit Varma]: generations tried to write like him, even after Arundhati won the Booker in 97, which
[Amit Varma]: is when Satya was shot. In fact, you mentioned her in one of your opening sentences to set
[Amit Varma]: the times too many people started, you know, trying to write like her. And I've often felt
[Amit Varma]: that in Indian cinema, one of our problems is that too many people want to be Anurag
[Amit Varma]: Kashyap, you know, in terms of the stylisation, the setups, the machismo, which is kind of
[Amit Varma]: there and all of that you kind of get what I'm saying just in terms of that style. And
[Amit Varma]: that can either be a good thing or a bad thing. It depends on the influence. You know, I think
[Amit Varma]: maybe Tarantino had a similar kind of influence on filmmakers there. And it just leads me
[Amit Varma]: to wonder that maybe if instead of Satya, there was another kind of film, maybe if Arsatya
[Amit Varma]: came out in 1997, at that moment where it is ready to capture the imagination, do you
[Amit Varma]: get something better? Because, you know, I don't know if you'd agree, but I just feel
[Amit Varma]: like Arsatya is a far superior film in every way, much deeper characters, just much better
[Amit Varma]: made much sort of everything is just kind of so much better and less on the surface.
[Amit Varma]: So I hope I haven't set you off by saying that. So what's what's your sort of reaction
[Amit Varma]: to this kind of trends that we pick up on that at a particular point in time where you
[Amit Varma]: are impressionable, you know, a Kashyap does something remarkable. So you are like, I want
[Amit Varma]: to be the next Kashyap. But it could have been something else. I mean, hopefully for
[Amit Varma]: today's generation, you know, Tamane can have that kind of effect. I'd definitely love to
[Amit Varma]: see many more Tamanes and Kashyaps. But I mean, no offence to Kashyap was such a fine
[Amit Varma]: director and writer. What was your response to this rambling of mine?
[Guest]: I would actually like it if they get influenced by Paranjeet or some of the very fine Tamil
[Guest]: Malayalam cinema makers or Nagraj Manjule in Marathi cinema, because they're the ones
[Guest]: who are really taking the commercial film forward in a way that it probably hasn't in
[Guest]: Hindi cinema for a very long time now. You're absolutely right in how people sort of pick
[Guest]: up and then stay loyal to whatever changes their conception of art at a young age. And
[Guest]: Satya did have that effect on me, though probably not to the extent that you might think, simply
[Guest]: because as I said, I wasn't really watching that much cinema at that time. But I did register
[Guest]: the force of it, even then it did seem like something very new. And just the sheer aggression
[Guest]: of Golimaar Bheje mein turning up on screens like a month before the film, it worked better
[Guest]: than any promo for the film could have because that was just the film in a nutshell out there.
[Guest]: And Satya, I don't think could ever have that effect, simply because, and I'm a big fan
[Guest]: of that film also, so I say this out of love, but it's a very uncomfortable film to watch.
[Guest]: I saw it a couple of times during my research of the book, and I'd seen it before also.
[Guest]: And it's just such a difficult, difficult not in the sense that it's boring or badly
[Guest]: made at any point, it's just a very stark exploration of masculinity and harshness of
[Guest]: the Indian male psyche. I think if it had been made in 97, perhaps it might have been
[Guest]: done at a better scale with a slightly better budget and the film might have looked better
[Guest]: and reached maybe a larger number of people. Though again, would you have everyone working
[Guest]: at the height of their powers like they were in the early 80s? Maybe not. But I don't think
[Guest]: its influence would have been that much more. I think Arsatya had just the right influence
[Guest]: in terms of getting a generation of filmmakers interested in showing a more realistic Bombay
[Guest]: and a more realistic police force, more realistic gangsters. Rama Shetty, who's the antagonist
[Guest]: in that played by Sadashiv Amrapurkar, is a very, very interesting figure for the gangster
[Guest]: film, I thought, in India, because he's after decades of gangsters being like these saints
[Guest]: or these tuxedo wearing people or Ajit or Prem Chopra or Prem Nath, you know, no shade
[Guest]: on them because they did their thing with great style. But there was that image of an
[Guest]: over the top, leering Indian gangster and he was different. He was quiet and he was
[Guest]: thoughtful. And it really gave options for people who wanted to maybe work in a slightly
[Guest]: more commercial format. And you can see Ramu run with the idea in his first film. Shiva,
[Guest]: the antagonist played by Raghuvaran in that is also soft spoken relatively and doesn't
[Guest]: get psychotic till very late in the film, which is unheard of at that time. And Ramu
[Guest]: is, of course, working in a very different sort of space than Govind Nilani was when
[Guest]: he was making Aaj Satya. But you can see that connection run through there. And of course,
[Guest]: then through on and into the more realistic gangsters of Israat Ke Subha Nahi and Satya.
[Amit Varma]: As an aside, you know, many years back in 2009, I wrote this mediocre novel called My
[Amit Varma]: Friend Sancho and Govind Nilani got in touch with me. And he said he wants to make it into
[Amit Varma]: a film. So we met and it was an amusing meeting because I was trying to convince him it wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: be a good film because it doesn't have that kind of narrative arc and all of that. And
[Amit Varma]: he was saying I want to make it and then it was really sad because he sort of went on
[Amit Varma]: this lament about how no one takes him seriously anymore and how the ecosystem and was so much
[Amit Varma]: better in the early 1980s when he made the films he did Aaj Satya, Party and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And he also bemoaned how he didn't even have a print of Party. He said I don't have that
[Amit Varma]: film. And you know, can you get it from somewhere? And those were the days you know, that was
[Amit Varma]: 2009. So I remember writing an email to a friend of mine in the US and saying just see
[Amit Varma]: if Netflix has it. Netflix was in the DVD rental business. So they had it, he immediately
[Amit Varma]: got a copy and shipped it to me. But by that time, I think it was available otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: as well. But that film never kind of happened after after a month, he kind of got in touch
[Amit Varma]: with me and we did a treatment together for a Hindi film. And then he said ki nahi abhi
[Amit Varma]: Marathi mein banatiya because I think and this is very interesting. He said the Marathi
[Amit Varma]: industry today is in the same stage as the Hindi film industry was in the 80s. To Hindi
[Amit Varma]: mein kuch hope nahi hai, Marathi mein banate hain. And we did a treatment set in Pune.
[Amit Varma]: But then I just completely dropped off from the map. So I don't think he'll be listening
[Amit Varma]: to this. But if he is, apologies, I just kind of disappeared on him. Because I could see
[Amit Varma]: it was sort of going nowhere. And I just felt very embarrassed about the whole thing. But
[Amit Varma]: anyway, that's an aside. Let's take a quick commercial break. And when we get back, let's
[Amit Varma]: start talking about Satya and gangster movies and city movies and and your wonderful book.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at India
[Amit Varma]: uncut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write
[Amit Varma]: about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on
[Amit Varma]: over to India uncut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment
[Amit Varma]: that I write will land up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe
[Amit Varma]: now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at India uncut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Uday Bhatia about his wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book on Satya, but it's on a lot more than Satya. It's also about Indian film history
[Amit Varma]: and the evolution of the gangster film in the Hindi film industry and the city film
[Amit Varma]: in the Indian film industry. Let's sort of talk about the gangster film tradition first.
[Amit Varma]: It's interesting that you also sort of set the historical context of, you know, post
[Amit Varma]: partition Bombay where you know, there are 1.8 million people here in 1941, that becomes
[Amit Varma]: 3 million in 1951. There are migrants, there's unemployment, there's easy access to ports.
[Amit Varma]: So you have, you know, an increase in crime, but they aren't gangs yet. You know, there's
[Amit Varma]: petty thievery, pickpocketing, as you point out, mugging in the odd heist. There aren't
[Amit Varma]: gangs yet. And you talk about Kismet, the 1943 film, which very sort of quaintly and
[Amit Varma]: something that seems to have a tendency that seems to have made a recurrence. There is
[Amit Varma]: this review of it by Film India, which castigates it for setting the wrong example and glorifying
[Amit Varma]: the wrong kind of person. I'll just read this out because I found this amusing quote, Bombay
[Amit Varma]: talkies have produced Kismet, a picture which glorifies a handsome criminal all throughout,
[Amit Varma]: makes light of his pickpocketing crimes, lends humor to his petty thefts, and ultimately
[Amit Varma]: restores him to a waiting fortune and parentage, not to mention the gift of the charming bride.
[Amit Varma]: Which young man would not like to be a criminal and a pickpocket after seeing Ashok Kumar
[Amit Varma]: achieve all this glory and popularity in Kismet? Stop God, which is kind of hilarious. But
[Amit Varma]: while this is an early example of sort of the Bollywood gangster film, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: speak about how in Hollywood, gangster films have almost, you know, come up with their
[Amit Varma]: own army of cliches. You speak about how 1932 was significant in sort of films like the
[Amit Varma]: Public Enemy and Little Caesar and Scarface releasing and they just lead to a bag of cliches
[Amit Varma]: to the point that even the Public Enemy is just in 1932, it's just considered to be just
[Amit Varma]: a way another variation on a trope, where the New York Times writes about it, and you've
[Amit Varma]: quoted this in your book, which is where I'm getting it from, quote, it is just another
[Amit Varma]: gangster film at the strand weaker than most in a story stronger than most in its acting,
[Amit Varma]: and like most maintaining a certain level of interest through the last burst of machine
[Amit Varma]: gun fire. Stop, quote, which you could say about so many films in the decades since.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a little sense of how this is sort of evolving, like in the sense that we don't
[Amit Varma]: have gangs at that time, yet everything is nascent, we do have petty crime. So the criminal
[Amit Varma]: that you see in our films early on are sort of these petty criminals, while Hollywood
[Amit Varma]: has a much greater tradition. Tell me of how in the early years, this kind of evolves.
[Amit Varma]: And also, are Hindi filmmakers looking to Hollywood for inspiration for direction, picking
[Amit Varma]: up things from there, which may or may not fit here? What's the sort of evolution of
[Amit Varma]: the gangster film in those early years?
[Guest]: So they're absolutely looking to Hollywood for inspiration, because anyone who's ever
[Guest]: made gangster films has looked to Hollywood for inspiration. It is one of the great American
[Guest]: art forms, the gangster film, it is very much an American thing. Everyone who has ever made
[Guest]: it has picked up things from them, whether it's the Japanese or the French, or Hong Kong
[Guest]: or Italy. It's all come from those very early 20s, 30s and 40s gangster films, which then
[Guest]: sort of are transmuted into various cultures and interpreted by them. But you can see the
[Guest]: initial, the Cagney's and the Edward Robinson's and the Ben Heck, and those films, those strands
[Guest]: sort of survive in all of those. And the people who made the first Indian gangster films,
[Guest]: and it's a little misleading to call them gangster films, because, as you said, they
[Guest]: don't really have bonafide gangsters, because there were perhaps not many real life inspirations
[Guest]: for those, unlike the US in the 20s and 30s, where there were a lot of mobsters. So you
[Guest]: just had to print the legend, as it were. Out here, there wasn't that. So you see a
[Guest]: lot of con men, you see a lot of pickpockets. Raj Kapoor is a small time thief in Awara,
[Guest]: in Baazi, Dev Anand is a card sharp, and there's a film called Pocketmar, which is obviously
[Guest]: about being a pickpocket and Kismet, Ashok Kumar is a pickpocket. So all these films
[Guest]: have these small petty crimes, even their rings aren't very big crime rings, they're
[Guest]: like small little crime syndicates being run rather than anything large. And it's only
[Guest]: when I think you start getting real life inspirations that the Hindi gangster film starts taking
[Guest]: a bit of shape, whether it's Kareem Lala, who gets a version of him played by Praan
[Guest]: in Zanjeer, or it's Haji Mastan, who gets a version of him in Diwaar by Amitabh Bachchan.
[Guest]: These are when things sort of start solidifying as the gangster genre, but the initial Hindi
[Guest]: gangster films were, of course, inspired by Hollywood very much. Sometimes they took the
[Guest]: plot lines from them. Sometimes they took the look from them. Also, confusingly, they
[Guest]: took a lot of their look from noir film, which is possibly why a lot of the people in the
[Guest]: years since have completely conflated the noir and the gangster film in India, which
[Guest]: is not the case. Noir is something very different from, well, it's not very different because
[Guest]: the two intersect all the time, but it is different in the sense that gangster film
[Guest]: is a self-evident genre. A film is a gangster film, if it has gangsters in it, the same
[Guest]: way as a Western is a Western. There's no other way about it, really. Noir isn't really
[Guest]: a genre. It's a certain set of psychological and aesthetic conditions, as it were, which
[Guest]: can be applied to various genres. So you have noir gangster films, but you also have a noir
[Guest]: Westerns like Red River, or you have noir science fiction, you can have noir melodramas
[Guest]: like Mildred Pierce. The mix of gangster film and noir was very strong in the 1950s films
[Guest]: that kind of started off the genre in India. And people like Dev Anand and Guru Dutt were
[Guest]: very big Hollywood fans, self-professed Hollywood fans. And so they were very happy stealing
[Guest]: like little ideas from them. And you can see a lot of those, the little things that Brando
[Guest]: was doing and then earlier what Cagney and Robinson and all are doing, the surface in
[Guest]: their performances, even though these films are a lot sweeter than those where you didn't
[Guest]: really get hard boiled films in the 1950s or 1960s out here, but they had a little of
[Guest]: that look. And they had some of the tropes of the gangster and the noir film.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, last week, I went out after many months to actually meet a bunch of friends,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in these post COVID times. And one of them was someone called Subrat Mohanty,
[Amit Varma]: who also does this excellent podcast called Hal Chaal Theek Thak Hai. And he gave us like
[Amit Varma]: a half an hour talk on the history of cinema and the history of noir. And he even spoke
[Amit Varma]: about the different sub genres of noir, like there's something called Florida noir, apparently,
[Amit Varma]: which is if you shoot noir with sunshine, with a lot of light, that's Florida noir.
[Amit Varma]: So I got to explore that further to see what that looks like. I want to talk a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about actually this early period of noir and what Navketan did. And the most striking aspect
[Amit Varma]: of that period was starting off and you know, there were a lot of knock on effects on to
[Amit Varma]: cinema later, which come all the way to Satya from there. But one of the most startling
[Amit Varma]: things about that was the impact of serendipity that Dev Anand and Guru Dutt actually met
[Amit Varma]: because their clothes were mixed up by a dhobi they had in common. And that's how they first
[Amit Varma]: met and they became friends. And then Dev Anand said, okay, you got a direct chit for
[Amit Varma]: me. And the two got together and just sort of made a bunch of films. There was Bazi and
[Amit Varma]: you know, you've spoken about Aar Paar and CID and CID is very interesting because one
[Amit Varma]: of the things that you sort of mentioned in your book, which took me down a rabbit hole,
[Amit Varma]: was you spoke about the song Leke Pehla Pehla Pyar, you know, which shows Marine Drive is
[Amit Varma]: desolate and empty. So instantly I went on YouTube and it's there. And it's a lovely
[Amit Varma]: song and it has 57 million views. And so just as an aside before we talk about the Navketan
[Amit Varma]: period and the Noir period, what is it fundamentally about so much of this older music that it
[Amit Varma]: remains so incredibly popular today? Is it just a selection bias that we just remember
[Amit Varma]: the best songs from all of these decades and we can't really compare it with all the random
[Amit Varma]: stuff that comes out? Or is it something that we have lost in some way, maybe in terms of
[Amit Varma]: approach or whatever? What's sort of your sense of this before, you know, we go back
[Guest]: to Navketan and Noir and whatever happened there?
[Guest]: I think it may be a bit of both. We certainly have lost our way in terms of Hindi film music.
[Guest]: And I say that as a huge fan of Hindi film music and someone who related to Hindi film
[Guest]: music a lot earlier than I related to Hindi films. I was a mega fan of A R Rahman growing
[Guest]: up in the 90s. It was the most exciting thing. Like I saw his rise and Sachin Tendulkar's
[Guest]: rise as pretty much analogous events happening at that time. Of course, there have been one
[Guest]: or two good decades even after that, but now things are in fairly dire state. So I think
[Guest]: we can leave that for other people to try and figure out why that's happening, because
[Guest]: I have no answers. But as far as the older songs are concerned, I think a lot of our
[Guest]: engagement with Hindi film is through music. And that seems like an evident thing to say,
[Guest]: but I don't think people realize the extent to which people relate to Hindi films through
[Guest]: music. I think that has changed maybe in the last one or two decades, where if you mention
[Guest]: a particular film, people will actually talk about things about the film. And maybe a few
[Guest]: films in history have been lucky that way, that you know, like if you talk about Sholay,
[Guest]: or if you talk about Kagaz Ke Phool, or Pyaasa, or Golmaal, or Jaane Bhi Do Yaaro, people won't
[Guest]: talk about the songs, they'll talk about the film. But if you talk about Pakiza, or if
[Guest]: you talk about pretty much any film from the 1950s, or if you talk about some of the early
[Guest]: color Vijayanand thrillers, which are superb filmmaking, Teesri Manzil is perhaps unmatched
[Guest]: in terms of just fluent commercial filmmaking at its best. It's incredible. But people will
[Guest]: still talk about the songs, more likely in conversation, and not too many will actually
[Guest]: get to the films. I think it is just something in the way we relate to films, maybe because
[Guest]: it is, you know, we hear it on the radio, and the radio was such a big part of Indian
[Guest]: life for so many years, that those were our first impressions of the film. Those were
[Guest]: what sold the films. And often they were what got people back to the halls. I think there
[Guest]: is just something in that, that is very central to our idea of films. And we just go straight
[Guest]: for the music, rather than the filmmaking. And that was actually something which I didn't
[Guest]: do because I didn't have that much of a background before I got really interested in films. When
[Guest]: I was looking at a lot of these older films, I managed to see them as a whole without having
[Guest]: too much idea about, oh, this is like a classic song that would always play. So some of course
[Guest]: I knew like CID or whatever, Pyaasa, Kaagas Ke Pool, Tisvi Manzil, these are just albums
[Guest]: of which everyone knows all the songs. But the less, like the other films that were made
[Guest]: by Navketan at that time, Aar Paar and Taxi Driver and Baazi, I didn't know too many of
[Guest]: those songs. So I was actually engaging with them when I saw the films. And it was very
[Guest]: interesting for me because I could appreciate them as craft, but within my appreciation
[Guest]: of the whole film rather than having an earlier impression of it already in my mind.
[Amit Varma]: It's also interesting, you know, in the context of the songs of Satya, there are at least
[Amit Varma]: two which are a startling departure in different ways. Like you speak about how Badalo Se is
[Amit Varma]: actually not voiced by actors, it's like a montage and that's become common enough. But
[Amit Varma]: at the time, it was very unusual to see a Hindi film song where people aren't running
[Amit Varma]: around trees singing and lip syncing to it. And also of course, Golimaar Bheje Mein, which
[Amit Varma]: as you point out, you know, Gulzar had written and Ramu didn't like it and or RGV didn't
[Amit Varma]: like it, as I am supposed to say, and went with it nevertheless, and then later realised
[Amit Varma]: that damn this works because it really strikes a chord like Gulzar just absolutely, as so
[Amit Varma]: often in his career just nailed the moment and the thing. What also kind of strikes me
[Amit Varma]: just sort of going back to the Navketan type was one you've detailed out many of these
[Amit Varma]: films and made me want to watch all of them again, because there seems to be a lot of
[Amit Varma]: spectacular stuff happening there. But then you also, you know, when you write about post
[Amit Varma]: noir Bollywood and what's happening after that, and it strikes me that there is also
[Amit Varma]: an evolution of both the hero and the villain, so to say, and the relationship between them,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that in these early pre noir, and maybe that if films of that era, your
[Amit Varma]: hero is just a poor guy, and society has been hard on him, and he's just unlucky. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: he can be the hero, even though he's a criminal, you kind of understand you root for him. Later
[Amit Varma]: on, you have an evolving gangster as well. And that also seems to me to be natural to
[Amit Varma]: come out of those sort of Nehruvian pre liberalisation years, so to say, where your typical gangster
[Amit Varma]: will be the crony capitalist businessman, your typical villain rather will be the crony
[Amit Varma]: capitalist businessman. And you're supposed to root for the hero who is fighting against
[Amit Varma]: those odds. And this kind of comes to a peak, perhaps in the 1970s, where even economically
[Amit Varma]: things were most dire for us. So how is this now evolving? As you pointed out that the
[Amit Varma]: noir films that were made by Navketan, for example, weren't gangster films, they it was
[Amit Varma]: just a stylistic and an aesthetic thing, and sometimes just a vibe. But they weren't gangster
[Amit Varma]: films as such, because they weren't gangsters. They weren't gangs in India, those heroes
[Amit Varma]: like Kareem Lala, and you know, Haji Mastan, and later Dawood in the mid 70s, they emerge
[Amit Varma]: much later. So give me a sense of then the evolution of the gangster period through these
[Amit Varma]: years, how that noir kind of dies down, though, obviously, semblances of it remain. And at
[Amit Varma]: the same time, you have the gangster film evolving.
[Guest]: So colour pretty much wiped out the noir film out here, because we didn't make films that
[Guest]: were emotionally noir, we made films that were aesthetically noir. We made films that
[Guest]: looked like noir, but they didn't have the true pessimism and the altered states of a
[Guest]: good noir, we didn't really do that much. We just made films with a lot of shadows.
[Guest]: And because it was by really talented cinematographers, like VK Moorthy and Rathra, they looked great.
[Guest]: And they resembled the noirs that we'd already seen. But colour, I think pretty much wiped
[Guest]: that out. In the 70s, then the gangster became this slightly cartoonish figure, because you
[Guest]: usually get these wealthy businessmen cast as gangsters, and they weren't really, you
[Guest]: couldn't really take them seriously. Even in the early Bachchan films, in Zanjeer, you
[Guest]: can't really take, you take Bachchan seriously, but you can't take Ajit seriously. It's only
[Guest]: when you start getting the real life examples that sort of you start moving towards a semblance
[Guest]: of the gangster film. There's this film called Dharmatma, directed by Firoz Khan, starring
[Guest]: Firoz Khan, 1975. Not a good film, though it was a big hit. It was a pretty blatant
[Guest]: copy of The Godfather, the first Godfather film. But it also used a real life example
[Guest]: of this guy who was known as the Matka King, because he would run numbers, which he would
[Guest]: pull out of a matka. And that would be the number for the day. And then I think his name
[Guest]: was Ratan Khatri. And that then you had perhaps the Charles Sobhraj influence on Don, maybe
[Guest]: not directly, but sort of the Jekol meets Charles Sobhraj might have inspired Don. So
[Guest]: you could see the gangster look for real life inspiration, even though the gangsters were
[Guest]: still not very interesting characters at that. You could call Vijay of Diwar a gangster smuggler,
[Guest]: but he really isn't presented as such. You don't really see him as that. If you think
[Guest]: of Vijay in that, you think of him as a brother, as someone who had a tough childhood, who
[Guest]: likes his mother, and not really as a gangster, because that part isn't really stressed. It
[Guest]: was like, oh, society has made it so difficult for this person. It was only in the 80s that
[Guest]: the genre sort of started taking shape. And when you got actual gangster films, you had
[Guest]: Subhash Ghai make Vidhata. You had this other Dilip Kumar film called Mashaal. In both these
[Guest]: films, Dilip Kumar is a reluctant sort of gangster. You had Arj Satya, which is the
[Guest]: cop film, but again, with a very interesting antagonist. And I think that was a huge influence
[Guest]: on the rest of the thing. And then as the decade kind of goes on, you get more and more
[Guest]: examples of this. You have Arjun, which brings in the gangster politician nexus, which you
[Guest]: see, of course, then in Shiva, and then you see later in Satya, and in all the subsequent
[Guest]: gangster films, really. But Arjun was one of the first films that I think did it in
[Guest]: a proper way, in which Sunny Deol becomes not quite a gangster, but he becomes this
[Guest]: muscle for hire for Anupam Kher's antagonist in that. And it's only by the time you reach
[Guest]: the end of the 80s with Hathiyar and Parinda in 1989, that I think you could say that we
[Guest]: started making bona fide gangster films. These two films are bona fide gangster films, fully
[Guest]: realised.
[Amit Varma]: A follow up question, which sort of strikes me like you've laid out the evolution of the
[Amit Varma]: Hindi film villain very well, where you talk about sort of the cartoonish direction that
[Amit Varma]: they went in. And I'm wondering if there are two impulses here for a Hindi film viewer.
[Amit Varma]: And one impulse is an impulse towards escapism, that hey, life is hard, and I just want to
[Amit Varma]: escape and I want to go I want to listen to songs, I want outlandish entertainment, which
[Amit Varma]: is why even through the 80s, you have cartoonish villains, like you've pointed out Sir Judah
[Amit Varma]: in Kars or Shakal in Shaan, or, you know, Mogambo in Mr. India, while at the same time
[Amit Varma]: in the same decade, you have this growing realism in films like Arsatya and Arjun and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, at the end of the decade, Parinda and Hathiyar, as you've sort of pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: that impulse might be the opposite of the impulse to escapism. It's the impulse that
[Amit Varma]: when you relate to something, when you see something that is real, and you can relate
[Amit Varma]: to it, there is that thrill of recognition. And I would imagine a greater involvement
[Amit Varma]: and empathy, therefore. And obviously, both these impulses can exist within the same person.
[Amit Varma]: So I can really enjoy an escapist film and at the same time, enjoy, you know, a real
[Amit Varma]: film, like enjoy Shaan and Arsatya together, if someone can.
[Guest]: But Subhash Ghai's Kars and Vidhata, which had a very cartoonish villain, and definitely
[Guest]: a slightly different portrayal of a gangster.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your take on these two impulses? Like, am I simplifying it too much? Or is
[Amit Varma]: it fair to say that there are these two impulses? If there are these two broad kind of impulses?
[Amit Varma]: Has there been a directional shift away from escapism towards actually relating to what's
[Amit Varma]: out there? And does that then make Indian cinema closer and closer to I mean, there's
[Amit Varma]: no such thing as a global mainstream, but generally, cinema anywhere or will there always
[Amit Varma]: be this parallel strands where, you know, even a lot of Hollywood commercial cinema
[Amit Varma]: is escapist to some degree. So what are your sort of thoughts?
[Guest]: The 80s certainly were a weird decade, because these two things are happening very much in
[Guest]: tandem, not only in parallel, a lot of the directors who I credit with moving the gangster
[Guest]: genre along, are also making the most incredibly commercial film stuff that you can imagine.
[Guest]: Rahul Ravel made Arjun, M. Chandra made Tezab, a little later in 1990, Mukul Anand made Agnipath.
[Guest]: These are out and out commercial films, they have no interest in being gritty for art sake.
[Guest]: Any concessions that they make towards grittiness, towards violence, towards a certain realism
[Guest]: in terms of their sort of psychological aggression, is all to the service of getting people to
[Guest]: the hall. They thought that it would be popular, they thought that it was in tune with the
[Guest]: times and so they did that. So I don't see it as very opposed to each other. I think
[Guest]: it just became more possible by then to present a slightly more violent, more realistic portrayal
[Guest]: of the streets, of criminality. They echoed what was happening in the cinema of other
[Guest]: countries more honestly, I guess, than they could in the 70s. And it just sort of came
[Guest]: about without, I think, too much planning. Arsatya would be an outlier. Something like
[Guest]: in the late 70s, Arvind Desai ki Ajeeb Daastan, which shows very much the effects of Martin
[Guest]: Scorsese's Taxi Driver on it and is a very unique view of Bombay in the sense that it
[Guest]: really sees it as this giant garbage dump and says as much, which was very unusual for
[Guest]: any film then or now. But those were films that were made by film school students, which
[Guest]: did not really hope to reach a large audience. It was actually, I think, the films that did
[Guest]: want to reach a lot of people that managed to push the standard along and make it a little
[Guest]: easier for things like Parinda and Hathiyar, both of which have extraordinary scenes of
[Guest]: violence and are quite stark, in between being pure commercial films also, to be possible.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also sort of written about how, you know, you look at Hathiyar and Parinda
[Amit Varma]: as very important films at that period in time. But you say that you can draw a straight
[Amit Varma]: line from Hathiyar to Satya. That Hathiyar was much more influential, even if people
[Amit Varma]: remember Parinda much more today. Elaborate a little bit on why that is.
[Guest]: Primarily because Hathiyar is a film of the streets. It's not as well made as Parinda,
[Guest]: obviously, though it is still, it has scenes of great power. But Parinda was made by technicians
[Guest]: who were at really the peak of their power, so it cannot compare. And Vidhu Vinod Chopra
[Guest]: is a better technical director, at least than JP Dutta. But Hathiyar has that rawness in
[Guest]: it that you can see in Satya, that the violence is the violence of desperation, of living
[Guest]: on the streets, close to the streets. It's not something that is so much related to
[Guest]: one's personal histories as it is a sort of larger social condition. In Parinda,
[Guest]: it's a very specific story of these people who are actually fairly well off. If you look
[Guest]: at the houses in Parinda, they're quite nice. They're at least upper middle class,
[Guest]: both antagonists and protagonists. And they all drive around in cars and they seem quite
[Guest]: well off. In Hathiyar, no one is well off. They're living in a chawl, same as the people
[Guest]: in Satya. They kill people over food. It is a sort of desperate world. And even though
[Guest]: Satya doesn't quite have the sort of star quality of a lot of the people in Hathiyar,
[Guest]: which makes it quite a different feeling film. It feels like an Indie, whereas Hathiyar still
[Guest]: feels like a film that wants to go out to a very large audience. There is that in common,
[Guest]: that desperation and that feeling of being off the streets. And I think it's easier to
[Amit Varma]: draw that line. Yeah. And there are, of course, other points along that line. You talk about how
[Amit Varma]: Israd Ki Subha Nahi and Bandit Queen, interestingly, were also important sort of way stations on the
[Amit Varma]: journey to Satya. Tell me a little bit about that. Israd Ki Subha Nahi, I remember watching
[Amit Varma]: it at the time and being very struck by it. But you're right, as you mentioned in the book,
[Amit Varma]: it just got forgotten by most people after that. People don't talk about it anymore.
[Guest]: I think it barely got a release in the halls. I've heard stories that say that it got one week
[Guest]: or something and then it was just removed. So barely anybody saw it. I think it started coming
[Guest]: on TV, which is where I saw it first. And to me, it seemed very weird when I first saw it,
[Guest]: because I wasn't used to that mix of genres, because it's kind of a gangster film, but it's
[Guest]: also a bit of social satire, because this world of these yuppie ad men mix up with these gangsters
[Guest]: and the clash is very interesting. It was an important signpost on the way to Satya,
[Guest]: because you had fully realized gangster characters. More than perhaps any film before that,
[Guest]: you had gangsters who were very much humans first. And just incidentally, they happen to
[Guest]: be gangsters. The Ashish Vidhyarthi character, the Sourabh Shukla character, all of them are
[Guest]: very much dealing with normal problems. Your father is nagging you, your wife is not getting
[Guest]: along with your friend, your brother is taking up with some girl that you don't approve of,
[Guest]: and the phone keeps ringing. And these are all like little things. There's this lovely little
[Guest]: detail that someone must have added where one gangster has a stone in his shoe. So he's limping
[Guest]: during a chase, which is just such a small little detail. And you can see that those kind of things
[Guest]: must have appealed to the writers of Satya, one of whom was Sourabh Shukla. And Sourabh Shukla,
[Guest]: of course, was not only played a part in Israd Ke Subah Nahin, but was rumored to have contributed
[Guest]: a bit to the writing, even though he said that I was a bouncing board for ideas. I didn't really
[Guest]: write anything, but I sort of this. But you can see that certain things would have appealed to
[Guest]: him. And the brotherly relationship between the two gangsters at the heart of that film also
[Guest]: is very much echoed in the shooting of Guru Narayan in Satya, the scene on the bridge where
[Guest]: he is like, meri bivi isko rakhi banti thi, mere bachche isko mama bolte the. That scene very much
[Guest]: has a parallel in Israd Ke Subah Nahin where Ashish Vidyarthi is charging Sourabh Shukla's
[Guest]: character with similar things. Ramu was a bit non-committal when I asked him directly if it
[Guest]: had an influence, but Kashyap and Shukla both felt that it was a very big part of it. So I think
[Guest]: there is a bit of Israd Ke Subah Nahin in Satya. Bandit Queen is a very interesting signpost
[Guest]: because it's a decoyed film, which is an entirely different genre in India. It really cannot be
[Guest]: clubbed under the gangster. The same as the Western and the gangster film in America, it cannot be
[Guest]: looked at as the same things. But Ramu saw it as somewhat of a model for him. He wanted that kind
[Guest]: of realism. He said that explicitly in an interview that I want realism the way Shekhar Kapoor had
[Guest]: done in Bandit Queen. And you can see that he picked up a lot of the cast and crew from there.
[Guest]: You have Bajpai, you have Sourabh Shukla, you have Ashish Vidyarthi, stunt director
[Guest]: Alan Ameen was from there. So a lot of people just were directly lifted off that production.
[Guest]: I think with the idea that they would bring something of the stark quality of Bandit Queen
[Amit Varma]: to Satya. Yeah, and I think you've kind of pointed out how all these guys really knew each other.
[Amit Varma]: Like apparently, which I learned from your book, Shekhar Kapoor, RGV and Mani Ratnam formed a film
[Amit Varma]: company together to make movies. So Dil Se is the only one they made, which is so fascinating. And
[Amit Varma]: yeah, you know, there's often stuff that we take for granted, but that had to have originated
[Amit Varma]: somewhere. And for example, you know, the different members of a gang having different personalities
[Amit Varma]: and interior lives and all of that, which as you point out, it was not common in Hindi cinema.
[Amit Varma]: And it was there in Satya and it was there before that in Israd Ki Subha Nahi.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, a gangster having a normal family life, like that very famous scene in Satya where
[Amit Varma]: Bhiku Matre goes home with Satya and he has that charming spat with Shefali Shah, his wife over
[Amit Varma]: there. And you have this little domestic quarrel with this hardcore gangsters being involved. And
[Amit Varma]: that again, you know, may not seem so unusual today, but at the time, it certainly would have
[Amit Varma]: been given what came before. You know, before we come back to Satya and zoom down upon it and look
[Amit Varma]: at that in detail, let's go to the other historical strand, which is the strand of the city film,
[Amit Varma]: which also fascinates me no end. Like Bombay is of course, a character in Satya. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: as you point out that the film could not have been made anywhere else, it would fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: have been a different film if it was in any other city. So tell me a bit about how have
[Amit Varma]: Indian films in that sense, you know, looked at Satya. I mean, you've pointed out how again,
[Amit Varma]: going back to Navketan, you know, when Chetan Anand made Taxi Driver, the Indian Taxi Driver
[Amit Varma]: of 1954, you know, in the credits, you have the credits ending with the last cast member,
[Amit Varma]: court and city of Mumbai, stop good. So tell me a little bit about how sort of Bollywood
[Amit Varma]: looked at or Hindi cinema rather, I don't know if you have a problem with the term Bollywood,
[Amit Varma]: like Shekhar Kapoor does, it just become standard shorthand. But how, you know, cities evolved in
[Amit Varma]: the way that they were sort of portrayed, especially, you know, Bombay slash Mumbai
[Amit Varma]: over the years, since that's, you know, the base of the whole industry, as it were.
[Guest]: So it's always been a little difficult to track where real Bombay quote unquote, starts and where
[Guest]: cinematic Bombay begins or ends. Because the two are, of course, linked, Bombay is the place
[Guest]: or and pretty much the only place where Hindi films are made. So you will get a lot of the city
[Guest]: in most Hindi films. But that isn't always anything to do with the real city. It's often
[Guest]: just a glimpse of the sea can be a tourist site, or it can be a famous landmark. But it doesn't
[Guest]: quite have much to do with lived experience. When I was tracking the city film, I wanted to see if I
[Guest]: could run through a couple of films over the years that had dealt with this lived experience in one
[Guest]: way or the other. And it's not as systematic as the as the gangster film thing where I could go
[Guest]: from like one year to the other and say, okay, it went from here to here to here. And these gangsters,
[Guest]: you know, these are gangster films. Out here, I think it jumps a little bit because I'm trying to
[Guest]: sort of see certain motifs that are emerging, for example, through language. Now, our idea of Bombay
[Guest]: has very much determined by the speech that we hear that the Bombay speech, the way it's sort
[Guest]: of evolved has very much shaped our idea of the city. And you can see that through films like
[Guest]: there's Aar Paar, where you have these mixture of tongues. And Abrar Alvi had written that before he
[Guest]: wrote Pyaasa and Kagas Ke Phool, which are, of course, the films that he is remembered for.
[Guest]: But in that film, he brought this sort of spokenness, as he put it to Hindi film. And
[Guest]: Kashyap, interestingly, said that that was the kind of spokenness that he wanted to bring to
[Guest]: Satya all those years later, because he tried to capture the actual rhythms of speech. And then
[Guest]: you see that down through the years, not so much in the Salim Javed, Amitabh Bachchan films, but if
[Guest]: you see the films written by Qadar Khan, Mukaddar Ka Sikandar and Amar Akbar Anthony, those have
[Guest]: that real Bombayya bhasha being spoken. And those really give that feel of a certain city talk.
[Guest]: You could also see it in films like Gaman and later in Albert Pinto, Gussa Kyon Aata Hai. So
[Guest]: that was one way in which the city sort of emerges, even if the rest of the film doesn't have,
[Guest]: say, a lot of location shooting. Then you had mentioned the 1954 Taxi Driver, which was largely
[Guest]: shot on location simply because they didn't have a lot of money. So their only solution was to
[Guest]: strap this lightweight camera that they had got from France onto the hood of a taxi and to go
[Guest]: out and just shoot the streets. At that time, it must have seemed a little strange to people.
[Guest]: Now it looks really fresh as compared to a lot of the other Navketan films, which are clearly
[Guest]: studio films. This is shot in the outdoors. You can see a lot of the people and the surroundings
[Guest]: and the city and it looks quite incredible. There was another film called Akhari Khat, which was
[Guest]: made about a decade later. It's also quite remarkable in the sense it is a child's eye view
[Guest]: of the city. They let this little toddler onto the streets and they just followed it with the
[Guest]: camera. This is a Chetan Anand film. And it was again a very unvarnished look at Bombay. And
[Guest]: these were later picked up by the parallel films and by the films made by the FTII graduates in
[Guest]: the 70s and 80s. And you get a certain idea, parallel idea of Bombay almost running through
[Guest]: these films and running through, say, the more commercial films. Even a middle of the road film
[Guest]: like Guddi, which starts off very early on when Jaya Bachchan arrives in Bombay. Her experience
[Guest]: of the city is through painted billboards of films of her celebrity crush, Dharmendra. And
[Guest]: you hear De Do Pyar, Le Lo Pyar playing on the soundtrack. And so this is a film that even
[Guest]: though it is in a slightly more realistic frame, she is experiencing Bombay as the cinematic city
[Guest]: and not a real city. It's a very interesting play by Rishikesh Mukherjee, which you have an
[Guest]: echo in Ramgopal Verma's Rangila, all those years later, whose opening credits have street noise
[Guest]: on the soundtrack. And you have stills of film stars on screen with the credits of the stars of
[Guest]: Rangila accompanying them. So you have like the city film as it were running parallel to the
[Guest]: cinematic Bombay film at the same time in the opening credits, in a film which is about the
[Guest]: people who sort of straddle real Bombay and cinematic Bombay. That's so fascinating. And
[Amit Varma]: what I also found fascinating was, you know, you've obviously got such a fine ear for this
[Amit Varma]: stuff. You've given so many great examples of this Bombayya, how it's come down through the years.
[Amit Varma]: Like I was struck by Mehmood in Bombay to Goa, saying, tumko kidar jane ka, which speaks to you
[Amit Varma]: at multiple levels. And there's this great example that I actually want to read out from Rangila,
[Amit Varma]: because it's a great example of show don't tell, where instead of just saying something, you kind
[Amit Varma]: of show it. Like the example that I like to sort of give my writing class of an example of this is
[Amit Varma]: when JBS Haldane, the scientist was asked why he shifted to India in his 60s, after living all his
[Amit Varma]: life in England. Instead of saying something like I wanted to live a simple life unconstrained by
[Amit Varma]: convention, he said, I don't want to wear socks anymore, which is so beautiful, because everybody
[Amit Varma]: relates to it, you immediately get it right. And similarly, in Rangila, you quote this lovely
[Amit Varma]: dialogue where two touts are talking, and one of them asks another one, kaisa chal raha hai dhanda?
[Amit Varma]: And the other guy says, solid bole toh paisa lane ka, taxi mein jane ka kya? I love this, because
[Amit Varma]: taxi mein jane ka, you know, this is what he aspires to. This is that visual image. Instead of
[Amit Varma]: saying like mujhe bohot ameer banne ka hai, yeh karne ka hai, woh karne ka hai, you know, just this
[Amit Varma]: simple plain image, which tells you kind of so much and is so evocative. I also, you know, after
[Amit Varma]: reading about it in your book, I've tried to find Akhri Khat because, you know, just to sort of
[Amit Varma]: elaborate and I couldn't find it on YouTube, I just found a song from it on YouTube. And just to
[Amit Varma]: elaborate, I mean, I can't believe such film was made in 1966. And you know, what really intrigued
[Amit Varma]: me and what I wanted to see was how in the film Chetan Anand cuts back and forth through time,
[Amit Varma]: not just how you have the city through the infant's child's eye. But like you point out,
[Amit Varma]: the basic plot of the film is this woman goes to leave an infant at her lover's doorstep,
[Amit Varma]: and she leaves a letter to that effect. But she changes her mind and takes the baby away,
[Amit Varma]: but he finds a letter and that's Akhri Khat. And then the woman dies and the infant is alone.
[Amit Varma]: So now this guy is out going through the street to look for the infant. And simultaneously,
[Amit Varma]: you have the city of Bombay through the eyes of the infant, you have these constant flashbacks
[Amit Varma]: happening and it's cutting back and forth through time where you show the relationship and all of
[Amit Varma]: that. And indeed, the song that I found on YouTube seems to show be one such flashback and shows
[Amit Varma]: them in happier times and all of that. And that's fascinating in this interplay of the past. And
[Amit Varma]: again, maybe, you know, there's a sense of that in the final scenes of Satya as well. You know,
[Amit Varma]: as Satya is climbing the steps to, you know, get to his beloved, and he's injured and he can barely
[Amit Varma]: climb and then you keep cutting away to this image from earlier in the film where she's on the roof
[Amit Varma]: and she's saying, come, come, come. And that was really well done. Extremely sophisticated,
[Guest]: which I hadn't sort of expected. And they chose those scenes smartly. They chose ones which were
[Guest]: outdoors and bright. Ramu explained it this way that he's like the film had become very dark
[Guest]: towards the end. I don't think he meant dark emotionally. I think he meant like it was just
[Guest]: like very dark. You hadn't seen the sun or the blue sky for a long time. So he's like,
[Guest]: I wanted a little bit of brightness in that moment. I think it was the editor, one of the
[Guest]: editors, Apoorva Srani's suggestion to insert those little glimpses of happier times with
[Guest]: Vidya's character just before he dies. And with Agarika, what makes it even more audacious is
[Guest]: that he folds a flashback into the opening credits, which is incredible. Like if it had been
[Guest]: done outside India by some French New Wave filmmaker, they would have been like, oh, this is
[Guest]: so audacious. And it's just a subversion of opening credits and things. And because it's
[Guest]: India and because the film is not available anywhere properly, I was very lucky that I saw it
[Guest]: somewhere floating around earlier when there was a good print floating around. Now, I can't get a
[Guest]: print that you can even see the action underneath all the mark. But it's a fascinating film.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. And what a tragedy that these are not preserved. Another thing that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: struck me in the narrative was how so many of these choices, like how do you show the city
[Amit Varma]: and all of that are determined by circumstances. Like you talk about how
[Amit Varma]: in the 70s, the big Bollywood films starring the big stars could not show the city too much.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, you put Amitabh or Shashi Kapoor out there in the middle of Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: they're going to get mobbed and it's just not practical. So today you could put somebody else
[Amit Varma]: there and do a deep fake and put their face but not then. And therefore, the sort of films
[Amit Varma]: where the city began to play a really big part were the middle of the road films,
[Amit Varma]: like the Basu Chatterjee films and Rishikesh Mukherjee and Bhimsen's Garonda and films like that.
[Amit Varma]: Films like that, which really begin to showcase the city as a character and therefore,
[Amit Varma]: the struggles of normal people who live there. Because like you said, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Amitabh can get mobbed in the market, but Amol Palekar probably won't. Which is sad.
[Amit Varma]: Amol Palekar should also get mobbed. So tell me a little bit about that period and therefore,
[Amit Varma]: how the way that they look at the city evolves. Because therefore, if you have middle of the
[Amit Varma]: road films with the kind of middle class characters that these directors put in their films,
[Amit Varma]: you also don't have that elite Bollywood-y look at the city, the South Bombay big houses,
[Amit Varma]: all of that. You have very much the common person like in Garonda, these two people who are just
[Amit Varma]: who just want a roof above their head, who are struggling to kind of find a place they can call
[Amit Varma]: their own, which is something every Bombay person can relate to, right? So tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about then the evolution of how the city begins to be shown in Hindi cinema and becomes a character
[Guest]: in so many films. Middle of the road cinema was instrumental, I feel, at least in bringing Bombay
[Guest]: to the forefront of Hindi films. I don't think it could have happened in commercial cinema
[Guest]: had that not happened through the 70s and the 80s in middle of the road cinema.
[Guest]: And it was done in such an unassuming manner that didn't call attention to itself.
[Guest]: Now we look back at Basu Chatterjee films and say, oh, wow, this is like the Bombay of that
[Guest]: times. We literally cannot see it in any other films. You can see it in Basu Chatterjee films
[Guest]: because he really had an eye, more than, I would say, Rishikesh Mukherjee, who is equal
[Guest]: in all other ways and maybe superior in some. But I think Basu Chatterjee did have the better eye
[Guest]: and his eye for Bombay is incredible. I think there is no song on the Bombay rains that is
[Guest]: better than the one in Manzil, Rim Jim Gire Sawan. And similarly, the double-decker buses,
[Guest]: best buses would turn up in so many of his films. And now you actually, I had to do a piece on the
[Guest]: double-decker buses. Someone else was doing a piece in Mint Lounge and I was asked to go and
[Guest]: look through Basu Chatterjee films because they needed a still and they couldn't get an image of
[Guest]: the double-decker buses from anywhere else. And they were like, okay, it must be there in
[Guest]: Bato Bato Mein or Rajnikanda or something. So go and look through that, which, and we did find
[Guest]: stills there. And you can see this through Pablo's slash middle of the road cinema,
[Guest]: the Saeed Mirza films, I think were also very perceptive about life in Bombay. The loose
[Guest]: trilogy of Arvind Desai ki Ajeeb Dastaan, Albert Pinto ko kussa kyon aata hai and Salim Langde pe
[Guest]: mat ro, they photograph Bombay very honestly. And you can draw some sort of line from them
[Guest]: through to Salaam Bombay, through to Satya. They are also very perceptive about life in Bombay,
[Guest]: about the mills, about the sort of disconnect between the new upper class, the new moneyed
[Guest]: class in Arvind Desai and the people whom he deals with. He has great contempt for them.
[Guest]: And that's unusual to see in a Hindi film, someone just calling Bombay a trash heap and saying that
[Guest]: all these people are sold out and I am so much better than them, even though it's obvious that
[Guest]: he is hardly any kind of virtuous man himself. And these are all very fascinating monuments to
[Guest]: Bombay in their particular time period. It's good that they were spaced out by some years,
[Guest]: because you sort of get an idea of how Bombay evolved through the films of Saeed Mirza.
[Guest]: You also have Mohan Joshi Hazir Ho, which is a fantastic black satire on Bombay and housing and
[Guest]: corruption and just the living conditions in Bombay. And then you have films like Katha,
[Guest]: also indebted to the middle of the road tradition, Sai Paranjpe Katha,
[Guest]: which is a beautiful look at communal living in Bombay. So I think the picture that came
[Guest]: through all these films was something that you could not see in the commercial cinema
[Guest]: of that time for a very long time until it sort of started to pick up in the mid to late 80s.
[Guest]: And the torch was carried by parallel cinema and middle of the road cinema for a very long time.
[Amit Varma]: Thought that just comes into my mind that, you know, where is that middle of the road cinema
[Amit Varma]: today? Like where is the Rishikesh Mukherjee or Vasu Chatterjee of today?
[Guest]: It's actually a thriving, I would say, a lot of the Ayushman Khurana films,
[Guest]: I would classify them as a new middle cinema. The things was Rajkumar Rao is doing a lot of
[Guest]: the films, Pankaj Tripathi is doing now. These would definitely slot in that tradition,
[Guest]: I would say. There was a film called Aankho Dekhi by Rajat Kapoor, which I think was quite
[Guest]: instrumental in bringing back the new middle cinema. And then it sort of took off from there.
[Guest]: You had Dum Laga Ke Haisha, which was also very influential. And then it's been one of the brighter
[Guest]: spots in my life in the past, say, five or six years. Maybe the better Hindi film, like 50 or
[Guest]: 60 percent of the good Hindi cinema that has come out in recent times has been in and around this
[Amit Varma]: tradition. Yeah, and interesting that many of these actors who are acting in these middle of
[Amit Varma]: the road films also interestingly acted in Satya like, you know, Manoj Pawar and Sushant Singh and
[Amit Varma]: just a whole bunch of these guys. And sort of just an aside for my listeners that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I was just while reading your book thinking about where do you see Bombay the best today?
[Amit Varma]: And it's actually not in cinema, it's in vlogs. So there are a bunch of vlogs I've started
[Amit Varma]: following, which I'll link from the show notes, people like Devdutt Dhani, Mohammed Saleem Khan,
[Amit Varma]: Satya Sagar, who, you know, and they are the starkest, the most real sort of images of the
[Amit Varma]: city as it is and the city evolving every day and growing every day, as you see, though, of course,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they are possibly more what you would call documentary sort of style than realism.
[Amit Varma]: And you've kind of written in the book about the difference between cinematic realism and
[Amit Varma]: the documentary style. But it's just that how through the years there is this progression
[Amit Varma]: towards greater and greater intimacy. And some of that, of course, has to do with the medium as
[Amit Varma]: well, because entirely different medium, if you're sort of vlogging for YouTube, as opposed to
[Amit Varma]: actually making cinema, though, I think there's a lot of good cinematic talent happening out there
[Amit Varma]: as well. Let's start talking about Satya now, we've kind of seen that it's not something that
[Amit Varma]: emerges sui generis, right? There's been this tradition of the gangster film that has gradually
[Amit Varma]: come to this point, there's this tradition of the city film, which has come to this point where the
[Amit Varma]: city is being shown for what it is. And then there is an enormous amount of serendipity and lucky
[Amit Varma]: accidents, which kind of happen and which sort of just come together right from you know, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Manoj Bajpai being one of the really important figures, and the way Manoj sort of runs into
[Amit Varma]: RGV, or I'll just say Ramu because that's what's coming into my head. The way Manoj runs into
[Amit Varma]: Ramu is that he auditions for Daoud, which is, you know, another film that Ramu happens to be
[Amit Varma]: making. And if he hadn't happened to be making that at that point, then you know, Manoj Bajpai
[Amit Varma]: would not may not have been associated. And therefore, Satya may not have evolved the way
[Amit Varma]: that it did. And then there are just a bunch of lucky accidents, which kind of come together. One
[Amit Varma]: lucky accident is actually a failure where RGV because he's influenced by Arsatya wants Vijay
[Amit Varma]: Tendulkar to write the film. And he goes to Vijay Tendulkar and there is some it's lost in
[Amit Varma]: translation and Vijay Tendulkar says no. And therefore, you know, Anurag Kashyap and later
[Amit Varma]: they get Sourav Shukla. And the way all of this is kind of happening where, you know, Manoj goes
[Amit Varma]: for an audition for some other film, becomes friends, gets Anurag in, Vijay Tendulkar says no,
[Amit Varma]: they get Sourav Shukla, all of this kind of just falling into place these incredible accidents.
[Amit Varma]: This kind of happens throughout cinema, right? So even Nafketan, you have, you know, some dhobi
[Amit Varma]: mixes up the clothes of Guru Dutt and Dev Anand and that's how they meet. And that's how those
[Amit Varma]: films happen. So what's your sense of, you know, looking at this that is there a counterfactual
[Amit Varma]: where there is no Satya, you know, where RGV does make something else entirely, and all these people
[Amit Varma]: go their own way. And perhaps none of us have heard of Manoj Bajpai and he he's in the footnotes of
[Amit Varma]: history as someone who played an interesting role in Bandit Queen and that's that. What does one,
[Amit Varma]: when you follow cinema history as keenly as you do, what's your sense of serendipity in the role
[Guest]: that it plays? Totally, I think there may not have been a Satya because Ramu is someone who
[Guest]: doesn't sit still. If a project is not working out, he is on to the next project. And that is
[Guest]: something that was true in his heyday. And it is still true today, where he is juggling four or
[Guest]: five projects at any given time. Satya was something that he really did want to do. He
[Guest]: wanted to make his first Hindi gangster film properly. And even though, like you mentioned,
[Guest]: Vijay Tendulkar didn't work out. Obviously, he was influenced by Arjit Satya and he would have liked
[Guest]: Tendulkar to be there. I'm not sure he wasn't happy with the way things turned out.
[Guest]: Not only because, of course, the script was great, but also because if you see the rest of
[Guest]: the cast and crew, there are a lot of people at the start of their careers without the anxiety
[Guest]: of influence, as it were. For example, he gets Gerard Hooper from the United States, who was a
[Guest]: professor then and a cinematographer, hadn't shot a feature film, hadn't watched a Hindi film. And
[Guest]: he got suggested by one of Ramu's friends and he saw his stuff and he brought him over. And a lot
[Guest]: of these decisions were taken. Sushant Singh was cast out of the blue just because he turned up
[Guest]: and Ramu liked his look and he liked his buzz cut and he said, haan aajao. And he cast him in that
[Guest]: part and then that really changed the way the film was shot. Sourabh Shukla didn't really want to
[Guest]: write, he wanted to act, but he knew he wouldn't get to act unless he also said, yeah, okay, I'll
[Guest]: write. So, and Ramu also knew he wouldn't get Sourabh Shukla unless he said, haan, you can act.
[Guest]: So, both of them did a slight compromise and said, okay, fine, he'll do both. One of the editors,
[Guest]: Apoorva Sarani, who was 19 years old then, hadn't ever cut a film. These were obviously deliberate
[Guest]: decisions by someone who wanted a fresh outlook in pretty much every aspect of his film. So, in that
[Guest]: sense, every film probably has these slightly serendipitous circumstances where you're like,
[Guest]: oh, if these two hadn't gotten together, then how would we have had so-and-so in this film,
[Guest]: so-and-so in this part, this person shooting the film. It's just that Satya was a very interesting
[Guest]: time. All these people were at the start of their careers, and there was a director, very receptive
[Guest]: and eager to use what they brought, rather than seasoned veterans at that time. So, I think the
[Guest]: quality of the serendipity was perhaps a little different because the intent was to do something
[Amit Varma]: slightly different. Yeah, and it's also interesting how a lot of these sort of newcomers
[Amit Varma]: kind of came in pairs. So, you had two writers, you had two cinematographers, and there also,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to be a very lucky accident. At first, you get Gerard Hooper, who is coming from outside,
[Amit Varma]: so he's bringing that outsider's view, and he's got that sort of realistic aesthetic and
[Amit Varma]: ethic, rather, and he just wants everything to capture Bombay as he sees it. And the cinematographer
[Amit Varma]: who takes over from him, Mazhar Kamran, also comes from that documentary tradition. So, stylistically,
[Amit Varma]: they are so suited to each other, and so sort of responsible for the vibe of the film. You also
[Amit Varma]: have sort of two editors, because one of them is working on an Avid, the other one is working on a
[Amit Varma]: Steinbeck, almost like, you know, again, the film is a literal bridge and Istanbul as it were, you
[Amit Varma]: know, between two different traditions, though, more a bridge in time than a bridge in geography,
[Amit Varma]: and the music, you know, Vishal Bhardwaj and Sandeep Chautha. So, tell me a little bit about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what do you feel about the music in particular? You know, one of the things I discussed
[Amit Varma]: with Jai in that episode, which you also mentioned, which I wonder what your opinion is, is the role
[Amit Varma]: of sort of background music in films, like I generally don't want to be spoon fed, like where
[Amit Varma]: there is background music, I want it to be subtle, not in a sense of, you know, spoon feeding me and
[Amit Varma]: telling me how to feel and all of that. But just adding another layer to whatever the storytelling
[Amit Varma]: is doing and a layer that is not redundant. And Sandeep Chautha's music here is very interesting,
[Amit Varma]: because parts of it, I really liked, it seemed to kind of work so much, but you also point out how
[Amit Varma]: so many people sort of reacted negatively to the music and said that, hey, you've spoiled it all.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, there's too much loud music and whatever. Tell me a little bit about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what were your impressions of it when you first saw the film with normal eyes when you're not
[Amit Varma]: writing a book on it. And then when you watch it again and again, and all of that, and you speak
[Amit Varma]: to all the protagonists concerned, how is your sense of it evolving? And is it an important film
[Amit Varma]: also for the way the music was approached? So I don't really have a problem with button pushing
[Guest]: music. I love John Williams's course for the Spielberg films and the other ones that he's
[Guest]: done. And he's the most button pushing composer ever. Morricone also, I wouldn't call him a
[Guest]: particularly subtle composer, but he's again, one of my favorites. I would say that I do not have
[Guest]: a fondness for very loud scores, just in terms of the mixing and the way it's used. And Satya can
[Guest]: be a very loud score at times, it drowns out dialogues as, as Sourabh Shukla pointed out
[Guest]: to me when I asked him about the score, and it also distracts sometimes, I guess it may be more
[Guest]: distracting for people outside India, people inside, people here are a lot more used to loud
[Guest]: and blaring music coming out of the films. I have mixed feelings about the score. I think it's
[Guest]: very effective in a lot of moments, the opening and closing themes when Satya is just arriving
[Guest]: in the city is this sort of mournful quality to them, which is a very nice downbeat start
[Guest]: to the film. And closing out also a very heartrending kind of flute melody, which is
[Guest]: there. But there's also moments where it's just, it's pushed up to 11. And I was asking Ramu about
[Guest]: it also, and he had said that, you know, I know that I do this to my film scores, but it's like
[Guest]: after the dialogue is locked and the sound mix is locked, the only thing I can play with is the
[Guest]: score. And so I keep fiddling with that. And I like to push it quite a bit. Interestingly,
[Guest]: someone who we mentioned a couple of times already, Govind Nelani was shown a cut of Satya before it
[Guest]: released. And he said that, Ramu, I think you've gone overboard with the score. And I think it's
[Guest]: not going to work. And he changed his mind after the film released, because he said that the
[Guest]: audience could relate to a lot of things that were going on in Satya because they're used to this
[Guest]: kind of score. And some of the things in the film that may have been new to them, were sort of
[Guest]: smoothed over by the fact that they were used to these kind of aggressive, loud button pushing
[Amit Varma]: scores. Yeah, and I think you've also pointed out in the book that how, you know, Mazhar Kamran,
[Amit Varma]: who shot more than half the film, you know, saw a cut of it without the music. And he told Ramu
[Amit Varma]: that, hey, you know, I think we failed. And Ramu said, wait, wait, wait, see the version with the
[Amit Varma]: music, and then he changed his mind completely. So I guess at certain levels, it worked. My other
[Amit Varma]: question is about the nature of how the script evolved. Like you've pointed out that one,
[Amit Varma]: of course, there is that early scene with Sushant where the power of improvisation came through and
[Amit Varma]: Ramu said, okay, you know, let's kind of stick to improvising, we have the caliber of actor who can
[Amit Varma]: do that. But then also Gulshan Kumar was murdered just as the film was underway. Different accounts
[Amit Varma]: have it on the second day, the fourth day, as you've pointed out. And I'll ask you a question
[Amit Varma]: about memory also, a little later. And Ramu decided that, okay, we got to take a break.
[Amit Varma]: And we got to incorporate what we are learning about this industry and about what's happening
[Amit Varma]: in the Bombay underworld and all of that through this. And indeed, you have a sort of a similar
[Amit Varma]: assassination as one of the plot points of the film, and all of that. The upshot of this was
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, at one point, you write, I'll just quote from your book, you say, quote,
[Amit Varma]: Kashyap is probably exaggerating only a little when he says that after the scene at the tabela,
[Amit Varma]: the writing process became a series of one-liners conceived by Verma and fleshed out by Shukla and
[Amit Varma]: himself. Ramu would say, today we'll shoot this scene, this happens, that happens, and so and so
[Amit Varma]: is killed. We'd go there and write the scene based on the actors available. One can picture Shukla
[Amit Varma]: and Kashyap frantically scribbling last minute zingers, handing those to the actors minutes
[Amit Varma]: before the shot and saying, forget what we told you earlier, just say this. How exhilarating it
[Amit Varma]: must have been if you were an actor used to situations like this. How utterly unnerving
[Amit Varma]: if you weren't. And it, you know, and this can, of course, be a strength. You have some
[Amit Varma]: incredible actors, though I didn't think so highly of Chakravarti, but we'll come to that later.
[Amit Varma]: But you have some, you have an incredible ensemble cast here. But it can also make for weaknesses
[Amit Varma]: where everything doesn't seem to, you know, fit together so well. Like, you know, I can both
[Amit Varma]: say wow at that scene, the railway footbridge or whatever, where Guru is killed and they have that
[Amit Varma]: impromptu exchange, which tells you that there is a backstory between them. But it seems sudden
[Amit Varma]: and unmoored from, you know, there's no hint of that coming. Had you had a hint that there is a
[Amit Varma]: backstory, then even the decision to kill this person, the chase of this person would have had
[Amit Varma]: an added resonance that is not there, because this is just improvised. It's not kind of there.
[Amit Varma]: Perhaps the actors themselves didn't know it at the time till they actually start talking like
[Amit Varma]: that. And, you know, so do you feel that that's a sort of a fundamental weakness of the film?
[Amit Varma]: And again, an opinion, which I think will not go down well with many people, and I say this with
[Amit Varma]: the greatest of respect. But when I saw Gangs of Wasseypur, it just seemed to me that it's a
[Amit Varma]: series of brilliant set pieces, but the whole is less than the sum of its parts. And therefore,
[Amit Varma]: there might also then be this approach that are a great scene, great scene, great scene. But does
[Amit Varma]: it tie together all that? Well, and I wonder if some of the approach there was similar as well.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your sort of thoughts on this? And please don't troll me, Wasseypur fans.
[Guest]: I'm one of them. Come to Wasseypur. I'll digress a bit at the beginning, because
[Guest]: I wanted to bring in something that I had in an earlier draft of the book, but then I cut out for
[Guest]: reasons of length and just not really fitting. But Jaws, the Steven Spielberg Jaws, actually,
[Guest]: the writing of it had quite a lot in common with what Satya seemed to have been. There was a script
[Guest]: by the original author of the novel that just didn't work. And it was rewritten by someone.
[Guest]: It was rewritten by someone else. And finally, they decided that none of those would work.
[Guest]: And by that time, shooting had started. And the shark, as you know, was malfunctioning,
[Guest]: and there were like a whole bunch of problems. But also, they really didn't have a script.
[Guest]: And so what they did was they wrote it from day to day. Spielberg and two writers and
[Guest]: Richard Dreyfuss would sit at night after the day's shooting, whatever had been planned for
[Guest]: the next day. And they would sit in right into the morning and the secretary would take everything
[Guest]: down. And then they would try and catch up on a few hours of sleep and someone would cycle off
[Guest]: and get it typed out. And those would be handed to the actors and they would do that. And that
[Guest]: was apparently how Jaws came about. And it seems that Satya was quite the same. I don't know how
[Guest]: much we should believe Kashyap in that, when he says that the whole film became a series of
[Guest]: one liners, because Satya in many seasons does have a written quality to it, not an improvisational
[Guest]: quality, even though people may have improvised within certain, you know, structured scenes.
[Guest]: But for example, the fight between Bhiku and Pyari does have that quality of a scene written
[Guest]: rather than things unfolding on the spot, even though there's a lot of
[Guest]: natural energy to that scene. Whether this worked against the film, I'm not sure. I like the
[Guest]: suddenness. You mentioned the Guru Narayan shooting on the bridge. I like the suddenness
[Guest]: with which it bursts out of Bhiku, because I feel it may be in character for him.
[Guest]: He obviously doesn't want to bring up in front of his gang how close he was to his big rival,
[Guest]: now Guru Narayan. And I think it would take something like this huge betrayal and seeing
[Guest]: that person sort of begging for his life to suddenly just drag it all out of him at that
[Guest]: moment and almost like in a mania. If it had come before, yes, perhaps it would have been a little
[Guest]: more resonant, a little more invested in him, in the whole chase, the way they run through and
[Guest]: the way he's begging. But I think the suddenness also has a virtue to it. And a lot of it was
[Guest]: apparently Bajpai improvising on a few broad pointers that he'd been given. He'd been told
[Guest]: that whatever, that they knew each other and they were friendly and their families knew each
[Guest]: other. But the specifics just burst out of Bajpai in that moment, apparently.
[Amit Varma]: And any angry response because of what I said about Wasseypur?
[Guest]: There's no doubt that Wasseypur has a lot of stunning set pieces, but I think it has so much
[Guest]: amusing little business happening between these. And it's so many little lanes that it goes down
[Guest]: through both culturally, politically, socially, bringing in so many aspects of the life out there
[Guest]: that I think it's quite a brilliant screenplay, really. So I say that, yeah, it fights with the
[Guest]: with the set pieces simply because Wasseypur does have that many great set pieces. But I think it's
[Guest]: actually as a structured screenplay, it is possibly superior to Satya in that sense that Satya does
[Guest]: have a slightly haphazard quality. There's really not so much of a A leads to B leads to C quality
[Guest]: about it. Whereas Wasseypur, if you map the whole thing out over its six or so hours, there is this
[Guest]: sort of broad constructed arc to it, I feel. Fair enough. Let's sort of talk about another
[Amit Varma]: haphazard aspect of Satya, which is Chakravarti in the main role. Like one of the interesting sort
[Amit Varma]: of narrative arcs of your book is how it's kind of understood that Manoj Bajpai will play the
[Amit Varma]: main role. And then the character of Bhiku Matre becomes so interesting, that RGV tells him that,
[Amit Varma]: no, no, no, you play Bhiku Matre and he's upset and he complains about it to Kashyap to the effect
[Amit Varma]: of that, you know, this was my one shot at playing a lead role, yeh kya ho gaya yaar and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And he plays Bhiku and he's just absolutely incredible as he's been through his career. I
[Amit Varma]: mean, he was so amazing in Family Man recently as well. But Chakravarti seems extremely uneven,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the only scenes where his acting seems to work is where he's supposed to show restraint
[Amit Varma]: because he is, I think, naturally resting face restrained. And there are scenes where you see
[Amit Varma]: a combination of his being miscast, I think, or rather acting and also the impromptu script,
[Amit Varma]: like you pointed out that scene between Bhiku and his wife where they're fighting, where if you just
[Amit Varma]: look at Satya's reaction, just not reacting, and I think you've mentioned in the book also is one
[Amit Varma]: of those confusing moments for you and you pointed out it may be partly because he wasn't briefed on
[Amit Varma]: what his character is supposed to be. But it seems like, you know, here is an actor who,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm perfectly fine with the character's backstory remaining mysterious to us. I think
[Amit Varma]: that's fine. You don't need to spell everything out and explain everything. But it almost felt
[Guest]: to me that the actor doesn't know himself. So interestingly, Ramu took a lot of blame
[Guest]: for whatever criticism one might level at Chakravarthy's performance on himself
[Guest]: by saying that he didn't have a clear conception of Satya's character from the start. And therefore
[Guest]: he couldn't give clearer signals to Chakravarthy. And therefore, like the kind of mulish confusion
[Guest]: that you see in scenes like the Bhiku and Pyari fight where Satya is just standing there. Ramu
[Guest]: at least said that it is my fault. It's not his. I couldn't tell him that this is how he's feeling
[Guest]: in that moment. Chakravarthy, let's face it, is not as deft as an actor as Bajpayee or Sourabh
[Guest]: Shukla or Shefali Shah or any number of actors in Satya. And I think his best scenes are when he has
[Guest]: to express Satya's personality through movement and through physicality. He makes very quick
[Guest]: darting movements which tie in with Satya's propensity to make quick decisions and bold
[Guest]: decisions. I have to slash this random thug in the tabela. We have to kill Guru Narayan. We have
[Guest]: to kill Amod Shukla. Decisions that ultimately backfired, but at the time they seemed like good
[Guest]: decisions at least. When he has a lot of words or when he has to do big emotional scenes,
[Guest]: it is a bit lacking. His scenes with Urmila don't quite work. And it's interesting because
[Guest]: other people have argued that he's sort of the blank slate against which everyone else can be
[Guest]: colourful and distinguished. I buy that argument to an extent. Whether he's miscast or not is,
[Guest]: I think, a difficult question. He was cast, I think, partly because of his look. I think
[Guest]: Verma just liked that he thought he looked like a gangster. He wanted someone from outside the
[Guest]: Hindi industry. He wanted someone from the Telugu film because he'd speak a certain way. He'd bring
[Guest]: that sort of man-from-nowhere quality. I think those are all smart ideas. They work at a theoretical
[Guest]: level. Maybe at a practical level, some of them backfired and some of them worked.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe I'm being too harsh on Chakravarthy and maybe I think a part of it is that the character
[Amit Varma]: was certainly in my mind not drawn out well enough because there are inherent contradictions. Like
[Amit Varma]: one of the things that struck me about the first part of the film is that everybody's stupid in
[Amit Varma]: the first part of the film where Chakravarthy is randomly slashing people and hitting people
[Amit Varma]: where he can easily get killed for it. Later in the film, he's portrayed as a kind of Chanakya
[Amit Varma]: of action and all of that, a strategist and all of that. But he's doing these really stupid things,
[Amit Varma]: taking pangas in the first part of the film with gangsters who could just kill him.
[Amit Varma]: And these gangsters aren't killing him. And that is very much at odds with when he,
[Amit Varma]: I forget the first guy's name, after he does that thing where he starts beating him up,
[Amit Varma]: you'd imagine that these gangsters will just finish him off, right? Rest of the film,
[Amit Varma]: that's what you see happening. Gangsters finishing people off, but instead they sent him to jail
[Amit Varma]: where he meets Vikumathre which seems like damn convenient and all of that. So that part of the
[Amit Varma]: thing where he feels more like, you know, this village idiot who is just responding and not
[Amit Varma]: thinking, who suddenly becomes his master strategist in the later part of the film,
[Amit Varma]: didn't kind of make sense to me, but which is not taking away. I mean, I think I'm really
[Amit Varma]: quibbling over one tiny aspect. There's so much about the film that is delightful and
[Amit Varma]: pathbreaking and all of that. So to go further on that now, tell me about what was the influence
[Amit Varma]: of Sathya? We've seen why Sathya comes at this moment in time. And one influence certainly is
[Amit Varma]: that these incredibly talented people work on the film and even are sort of part of the extended
[Amit Varma]: ecosystem of the film. Like you talk about how, you know, Sriram Raghavan and Tigmanshu Dhulia,
[Amit Varma]: when they see the film for the first time at the premiere, and they're going back in the taxi,
[Amit Varma]: and they're both just sitting in silence, just taking it in what a powerful film this is. And
[Amit Varma]: of course, we know what kind of films those two went on to make. So tell me a bit about the
[Amit Varma]: influence of Sathya on what came later. And does it then justify, you know, the great man theory,
[Amit Varma]: we can call it the great film theory here that had it not been for Sathya, the industry would
[Guest]: have gone in a very different direction. I think that claim can be made for a bunch of reasons.
[Guest]: The change or the changes really took maybe a couple of years to start appearing in and they
[Guest]: were a lot of them were hidden, which was why couldn't directly attribute them as easily to
[Guest]: Sathya as say, one could to something like Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge. In whatever changes that
[Guest]: film brought, and one could argue that that is even more than Sathya, you could see on the surface,
[Guest]: their entire plot lines picked up, entire types of characters picked up, look picked up. And you
[Guest]: can see that till this day, with Sathya things were a little more at a foundational level,
[Guest]: I feel for Hindi film. One was its legacy in terms of just the people who worked on it,
[Guest]: what they went out and did after that. Vishal Bhardwaj making his films, Anurag Kashyap making
[Guest]: his films, Apoorva Srani, Shahid and Aligarh, which went on to win a national award and
[Guest]: Sourabh Shukla is I think one of the best character actors and definitely one of the
[Guest]: most underrated character actors in the past 20 years. And Shefali Shah went on to do
[Guest]: great things. Sandeep Chautha had a very flourishing career for a decade after that.
[Guest]: Just the list just goes on. Secondly, you could trace the new Hindi or the new Hindi Indie
[Guest]: film movement back to Sathya, I think with maybe a few more films that came around around that time.
[Guest]: But Sathya definitely had an influence on it, not only in terms of showing that a specific
[Guest]: sort of film, not pandering to a very large audience, but again, not an art film, could
[Guest]: find success and could find cultural resonance. And I think that was picked up by people in the
[Guest]: 2000s when they started making their own films, younger filmmakers who came in, even though their
[Guest]: films may not have looked like Sathya, I think they took its lessons forward. They took its
[Guest]: idea of casting forward. I think the influence of Sathya on Hindi film casting has been immense.
[Guest]: You speak to a lot of casting directors and they will mention Sathya, specifically Manoj
[Guest]: Bajpayee, Bhiku Matre, but also just the idea of the ensemble in that film as something that
[Guest]: really brought that idea of a talented group of young actors and not any stars to the forefront,
[Guest]: where it was just not common in anything like mainstream Hindi cinema at least. You would see
[Guest]: it in your parallel films, something like a Jaane Bhi Do Yaaro, but even in Jaane Bhi Do
[Guest]: Yaaro, the people were quite well known at that time, whereas in Sathya, nobody was known except
[Guest]: for Paresh Rawal and Urmila at that time. That idea of an ensemble where people are cast for
[Guest]: particular parts and where each part sort of manages to spark and have its little moment,
[Guest]: you start seeing pretty early on in the 2000s and in Teghmanshu Dhulia's films, in Hasil,
[Guest]: you can see that where Irrfan is surrounded by all these people and they're all fantastic
[Guest]: little parts, brilliant, and you can even see it in more mainstream, the first Munna Bhai film,
[Guest]: I think it had a beautiful ensemble and going on through the decade then all the way through to
[Guest]: Aankho Dekhi and the kind of films that came after that in the new middle cinema, really have this
[Guest]: idea of the ensemble and very specific casting that is continued till this day. Apart from that,
[Guest]: Sathya really made space for a particular kind of character actor. It wasn't like they didn't
[Guest]: exist before, but you really had a lot of character actors coming through in the 2000s and most of
[Guest]: them, if not all, do credit Sathya with changing something in the idea of the public and in terms
[Guest]: of and for producers and directors also as to the kind of faces they want, the kind of actors that
[Guest]: they want in their things. If you look at Irrfan and Nawaz, of course, breakthrough in the 2000s,
[Guest]: but you also have KK Menon and then you have Piyush Mishra and then later they're joined by
[Guest]: Seema Pawar, Sheeba Chadda, Sanjay Mishra, Pankaj Tripathi and so on and on and on and on and now
[Guest]: and Rajkumar Rao and it's just gone on from there and you have this flowering of character actors
[Guest]: to the point where now they are no longer seen as character actors and they're carrying their
[Guest]: own films simply because they were so convincing in those parts and they stole films from the people
[Amit Varma]: who were the stars. So, you know, I'll leave it to listeners to kind of read your book and go
[Amit Varma]: through the rest of your narrative. There's so much detail and nuance in there. I'll end with
[Amit Varma]: like three final questions, which often becomes more than three because I think of stuff along
[Amit Varma]: the way. But my third last question is really about, you know, the interesting observation
[Amit Varma]: you made that while you were talking to people about this film, their memories conflicted so
[Amit Varma]: much with each other. Like nobody seemed to remember the same event in the same way. Like
[Amit Varma]: you point out about the, you know, the voiceover at the start of the film, where it's basically
[Amit Varma]: all you could figure out is which two people did not write it. But otherwise, there are different
[Amit Varma]: stories about everybody basically having written it from Ramu to Manoj to Saurabh to so on and so
[Amit Varma]: on, all of that. Obviously, nobody is lying. So, you know, because why would they do that?
[Amit Varma]: And this leads me to kind of thinking about the nature of memory itself, why we remember the
[Amit Varma]: things we do and how that evolves. Like one almost cliche on my show, because it's an observation
[Amit Varma]: that struck me so much that I keep making it from time to time is how the way memory works is when
[Amit Varma]: we remember an incident for the first time, we remember what happened. But after that, we remember
[Amit Varma]: the remembering of it. And therefore, you can have a kind of Chinese whispers in your brain.
[Amit Varma]: And you and I might remember something slightly differently to begin with. But that difference
[Amit Varma]: magnifies and becomes a whole new thing if you ask us 10 years later. So what's your sense? Like
[Amit Varma]: is this something that took you by surprise? Like what is happening? Why are they telling me different
[Amit Varma]: things? Should I look at their motives? Is somebody lying? And obviously, I think the most simple
[Amit Varma]: explanation is that no one is lying. Everyone's saying it as they remember it, but they remember
[Amit Varma]: it so differently. So what have your thoughts been while, you know, going through this process?
[Guest]: It completely took me by surprise. And it's not that long ago. I mean, it's 20 years, but
[Guest]: books have been written about films that are 40 years older. And I think if people can remember
[Guest]: that, then you'd think that events would be generally fresher for Satya, but apparently not.
[Guest]: I was, in equal parts, very frustrated and quite amused by it. It was very funny. Like as you
[Guest]: mentioned, the opening voiceover is attributed as people literally saying that no, that guy wrote
[Guest]: it and no one is even claiming it. But everyone's pointing to a different person. But it's even
[Guest]: weirder with something like the killing of Gulshan Kumar, which should be a very big event
[Guest]: in these people's memory, considering they were working on a gangster film at that time,
[Guest]: they should be able to remember where they were, what they were doing, maybe how many days into the
[Guest]: shoot. They were nothing, all different, everything different. Even Ramu gave me two different
[Guest]: versions of how he heard the news. So it was just incredible to me how much they mismatched. So
[Guest]: it was a bit of a challenge for me to try and figure out which were the correct versions or
[Guest]: which were the ones that they had sort of told themselves, which couldn't possibly be the truth,
[Guest]: but which just sounded like a good story. And there's, I mean, there's a lot of value in a good
[Guest]: story. I'll give you an example. There's a, there's a Anurag Kashyap blog, which he had done
[Guest]: maybe 10 years back in which he had talked about Goli Mar Bheje Mein and he said that the song
[Guest]: wasn't written then. So they were all dancing to Mera Piya Ghar Aaya on the set. And that seemed
[Guest]: to me not correct, but I spoke to Anurag fairly early on in the thing. So I didn't have any fun
[Guest]: to contradict him. So when I spoke to Vishal later, I asked him that is this thing, you know,
[Guest]: he's like Anurag is talking rubbish. The song was very much composed and you can see them
[Guest]: lip syncing the words in the song, which is what I had noticed before. But I was wondering whether
[Guest]: it's just it, my eyes were playing tricks on me or something like that. So there are
[Guest]: some stories which could be debunked a little easier. And there were some where I just had to
[Guest]: choose the ones that seemed closest to the truth or present two different versions and
[Guest]: tell the reader to just choose whichever one they wanted. Or eight different versions as the case
[Amit Varma]: may be. Yeah. So my penultimate question then is that how have you changed in the course of
[Amit Varma]: writing this book? Like has it given you a deeper appreciation of Indian cinema and you know,
[Amit Varma]: all the currents and sub currents that lie within it? Has it sort of brought about more humility?
[Amit Varma]: Has it, you know, improved your workflow, you know, just your work ethic and the way you gather
[Amit Varma]: knowledge together and compile it, you know, because, you know, just writing a book instead
[Amit Varma]: of writing a piece would have required far greater rigor and that could just change your methods
[Amit Varma]: completely. So take me a little bit through, you know, how you feel, what this whole process was
[Amit Varma]: like of writing the book and whether you feel it's changed you and if so, how?
[Guest]: So I don't know if it's brought a deeper appreciation of Hindi film, though I've learned
[Guest]: so much more about it just through researching, you know, the various things that I had to.
[Guest]: But I will say that it's brought a lot of respect about the filmmaking process and how much can come
[Guest]: up through chance and also how much is actually dictated by what people plan and how these two
[Guest]: things combine. And it's very difficult to sort of guess what will come out even if you are a
[Guest]: talented bunch of people and you have some idea of what you're doing. And it is interesting that
[Guest]: I, as my job is to sit in judgment of a lot of these films. And just to me, it was revealing
[Guest]: to know that a lot of the time you're not quite sure about what you're doing as a filmmaker,
[Guest]: as a cast or crew member while you're in it, and you are just conspiring to try and achieve
[Guest]: something without really being able to control it to an exact degree. And that, I think, has
[Guest]: informed my writing recently a little bit, just a little bit of respect for that process.
[Guest]: In a more specific sense, I think 80s commercial film was something that I looked on with
[Guest]: not much interest and a bit of contempt. And I think I had a renewed appreciation for a lot of
[Guest]: that through this book, simply because that was the decade that gangster film started getting
[Guest]: solidified. So I had to look at it with some seriousness. And I saw a lot of things that I
[Guest]: wouldn't have seen, I think, if I wasn't looking at it through that lens and that sort of feeling
[Guest]: that the 80s was a graveyard of Hindi cinema. I feel I have grown out of that now. I think it's
[Guest]: now I think it's a very fascinating decade.
[Amit Varma]: Well, fascinating. And I hope you, you know, continue writing books like this and
[Amit Varma]: sort of larger works, because I think for readers like me, it's such a rich experience
[Amit Varma]: to sort of go down these rabbit holes. And my last question, regards those rabbit holes,
[Amit Varma]: like typically, I usually ask my guests at the end of a show to recommend books that want everyone
[Amit Varma]: to read. But in your case, I have something different and more specific. And I know you're
[Amit Varma]: incredibly knowledgeable about world cinema. And I'll link your blog from the show notes as well,
[Amit Varma]: where you have some amazing pieces. And you know, maybe next time we can talk a bit more in detail
[Amit Varma]: in general about cinema. But right now, what I'll ask you to do is recommend Indian films,
[Amit Varma]: which you feel are underappreciated and people may not have seen, which are available to see
[Amit Varma]: ideally on YouTube. So not like Akhri Khat, which is not available anywhere, but which you know,
[Amit Varma]: the moment the listener hears the name, she can just go and watch it right away. So I know that
[Amit Varma]: I'm you know, I didn't give you time to prepare for this. So just 2345, whatever films that you
[Amit Varma]: strongly feel that hey, everyone should watch this that I was so surprised by this. And you know,
[Guest]: why don't you go and watch it and here is where you can. So I'll give a mixture of a couple of
[Guest]: city films and a couple of gangster or semi gangster films, which I discovered through
[Guest]: the writing of this. There is a Shammi Kapoor film called Chinatown, directed by Shakti Samant,
[Guest]: which I think is the purest early gangster film of the lot. It's a black and white film. It's
[Guest]: actually the plot of Dawn, some two decades before Dawn, where Shammi Kapoor plays a double role
[Guest]: of a gangster, and this musician was sent to impersonate him so that the police can
[Guest]: nab his crew. And it's fantastic. It's a bit of a comedy thriller thing. And a lot of the gangster
[Guest]: tropes from the Hollywood films of the 1930s, 40s are there in it. It's a fascinating film,
[Guest]: and you'll find it online in a decent print on, I think on YouTube, so you can see that.
[Guest]: The next one is a city film. It's called 27 Down. It is the only film directed by
[Guest]: Avtaar Krishna Kaul, who died very young. And this was the one film that he made. It's a
[Guest]: fantastic look at this young man who wants to have a more artistic life, but
[Guest]: because he has a slightly domineering father and he needs money in Bombay, he takes this job as a
[Guest]: ticket guy on a railway. And it's a beautiful look at Bombay's trains. And it has this slight
[Guest]: feel of a new wave film, but also just a very beautiful look at late 70s Bombay. And
[Guest]: beautiful photography, again, black and white by A.K. Bir, and it should be available online.
[Guest]: There were a couple of very nice prints floating around. I would recommend anyone who hasn't seen
[Guest]: Arvind Desai Ki Aajeeb Daastan to check that out, because it's Saeed Mirza's first film, if I'm not
[Guest]: mistaken. And it's quite an unusual film in the vitriolic nature of it. We don't quite make these
[Guest]: films with such disaffected protagonists and such sheer contempt for our cities and
[Guest]: all our institutions. So I think that might be very interesting. And you should, if you've seen
[Guest]: Taxi Driver, you'll see a lot of parallels with that. So anyone who's seen Taxi Driver and likes
[Guest]: it might want to see what happened two years later when this film was made. The last film I'll
[Guest]: mention is this gangster cop film with Arshad Warsi called Seher. A very lovely film set in
[Guest]: Lucknow. One of the examples of the gangster film slash cop film moving out of Mumbai, which it did
[Guest]: very successfully in the mid 2000s, and then continued to do so through Wasseypur and till
[Guest]: the current day, Mirzapur and stuff. Excellent, very tight, economical film and a very good
[Guest]: example of how the genre became very professional and very rich just a couple of years after
[Guest]: Satya. And yeah, I think that's about it. Thanks for these recommendations. Now I know
[Amit Varma]: what I'm doing all night. You know, Uday, thanks so much for coming on the show. I
[Amit Varma]: love reading your book. I love chatting with you. And I hope we have more chats and more books.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much, Amit. This was a lovely chat.
[Amit Varma]: Happy listening. And you know, given the subject of this episode and all the rabbit holes in the
[Amit Varma]: show notes, happy viewing. Did you enjoy this episode of the Seen and the Unseen? If so,
[Amit Varma]: would you like to support the production of the show? You can go over to seenunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.